Silent Vector
Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Center for Strategic and International Studies Washington, D.C.

September 2003

About CSIS
For four decades, the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS) has been dedicated to providing world leaders with strategic insights on--and policy solutions to--current and emerging global issues. CSIS is led by John J. Hamre, former U.S. deputy secretary of defense. It is guided by a board of trustees chaired by former U.S. senator Sam Nunn and consisting of prominent individuals from both the public and private sectors. The CSIS staff of 190 researchers and support staff focus primarily on three subject areas. First, CSIS addresses the full spectrum of new challenges to national and international security. Second, it maintains resident experts on all of the world's major geographical regions. Third, it is committed to helping to develop new methods of governance for the global age; to this end, CSIS has programs on technology and public policy, international trade and finance, and energy. Headquartered in Washington, D.C., CSIS is private, bipartisan, and tax-exempt. CSIS does not take specific policy positions; accordingly, all views expressed herein should be understood to be solely those of the author(s).

© 2003 by the Center for Strategic and International Studies. All rights reserved.

Center for Strategic and International Studies 1800 K Street, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20006 Tel: (202) 887-0200 Fax: (202) 775-3199 E-mail: books@csis.org Web site: http://www.csis.org/

Contents
Introduction..................................................................................................1 I. Issues of Concern in Aviation Security....................................................3 II. Issues of Concern in Nuclear Power Plant Security................................6 III. Issues of Concern in the Homeland Security Threat Advisory and National Warning System.....................................................8 IV. Issues of Concern in Chemical Operations Security ...........................13 V. Concluding Observations ......................................................................16 Appendix A. Silent Vector Role Players ....................................................20 Appendix B. Threat-Vulnerability Matrix .................................................21 Appendix C. Aviation Security Roundtable Participants ..........................22 Appendix D. Nuclear Power Plant Security Roundtable Participants .......24 Appendix E. Homeland Security Threat Advisory and National Warning Roundtable Participants..............................................25 Appendix F. Chemical Operations Security Roundtable Participants .......27 About the Silent Vector Exercise ...............................................................28

iii

Silent Vector
Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Center for Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C. 1

Introduction
In the two years since the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001, America has been transformed. America has been mobilized with a goal of improving homeland security. Virtually every organization--public and private--has considered plans to improve situational awareness and the security of its operations and premises. As never before, individual Americans are conscious of security risks and the need for stronger protective measures. Government organizations at all levels have initiated security improvement programs. In the case of the federal government, the most sweeping reorganization since World War II is underway. The full benefit of this reorganization, however, is still some time in the future because of the enormous dislocation that comes with such farreaching organizational changes. Despite the many areas of improvement, there is still no concrete way to solve the central problem of homeland security--how does the government warn citizens and undertake prudent protective measures when the precise nature and timing of a potential attack is unknown? To address this critical problem, the Center for Strategic and International Studies (CSIS), in partnership with the ANSER Institute for Homeland Security, conducted a tabletop exercise entitled Silent Vector in October 2002 at Andrews Air Force Base. This exercise simulated a meeting of the National Security Council (NSC) that forced the role players to deal with the possibility of a highly likely but inherently ambiguous terrorist threat.

1

This report was produced from contributions made by (in alphabetical order): Philip Anderson, Amanda Dory, John Hamre, Robert McMullin, Steven Netishen, and Cynthia Pettitt.

1

2

Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

In the simulation, 2 the "NSC" was informed of credible intelligence that indicated an attack was highly likely in two days and that the likely target was energy infrastructure someplace on the East Coast of the United States. The most important component of the intelligence was in doubt because it rested on the verbal report of a so-called walk-in at an American embassy in a foreign capital, and the informant failed a polygraph test administered at the time of his report. The NSC had to contemplate two questions at the outset: Is the threat credible in light of the shallow intelligence basis? If it is credible, what are the terrorists likely to attack, and where should we place our priorities? Initially, the NSC decided that the threat was too vague and imprecise to take concrete steps associated with any specific installation or industry. Instead, the NSC ordered a general elevation of the color-coded threat advisory system. This step raised its own set of issues, which are discussed below in section III. Second, the NSC confronted the enormous complexity of deciding how to proceed with specific protective measures against a wide range of potential infrastructure targets spread over an enormous geographical distance. To help organize the discussion of likely targets and to enable the NSC to prioritize protective measures, CSIS personnel, in cooperation with sector representatives, created a "threat-vulnerability matrix," which arrayed basic categories of infrastructure (e.g., nuclear power plants, chemical facilities, etc.) and reviewed their susceptibility to attack using various methods of hijacked or acquired assets (e.g., aircraft, truck bombs, container ships, etc.). The development of the vulnerability matrix involved extensive analyses of the vulnerabilities inherent in various elements of the energy infrastructure and the safety and security procedures in the management of these sectors. 3 The NSC staff presented an analytic assessment of potential risk based on a systematic review of targets and attack methods. That analysis had four primary conclusions: § First, aircraft remain a highly relevant method of attack because of their enormous destructive capacity and their ability to reach a wide and varying range of targets. Of the types of aircraft, it was judged that commercial passenger aircraft are less likely to be used by terrorists because of the significant security improvements that had been undertaken by the Transportation Security Administration. Other types of aircraft-- charter, cargo, and general aviation--were judged more likely modes of attack. The issue of aviation security is discussed below in section I, "Issues of Concern in Avia tion Security." Second, nuclear power plants played a prominent role in the analysis and discussion. While nuclear power plants themselves have impressive security features, their political sensitivity in communities makes them a special case for consideration. Implications of terrorist attacks on the

§

2 3

Silent Vector exercise participants are listed in appendix A. The threat-vulnerability matrix is presented in appendix B.

Center for Strategic and International Studies 3

nuclear power industry are discussed in section II, "Issues of Concern in Nuclear Power Plant Security." § Third, the analysis produced a number of important insights on how to improve the ability of government officials at all levels (federal, state, and local) to issue warnings and advisories. The key findings and recommendations for a homeland security threat advisory and national warning system are discussed in section III, "Issues of Concern in the Homeland Security Threat Advisory and National Warning System." Fourth, the analysis demonstrated the risk inherent in the chemical industry--the production, transportation, and storage of chemicals. The widespread use and destructive potential of chemicals makes them a specific issue of concern. These issues are discussed in section IV, "Issues of Concern in Chemical Operations Security."

§

The original Silent Vector briefing contained powerful insights into the challenges facing the federal government. With the support of the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT), CSIS conducted a follow-on seminar series to further examine the key issues and challenges presented in these four areas--aviation, nuclear power, alerting and warning, and chemical industry. Each of these issues will be discussed briefly in the following sections. A concluding section, section V, will examine some critical crosscutting issues that emerged in the course of this analysis.

I. Issues of Concern in Aviation Security
Since the tragic events on September 11, 2001, no sector of American society has been more transformed than aviation. Congress immediately established a new Transportation Security Administration (TSA) and mandated tough milestones for security performance, notably for passenger aircraft, in the Aviation Transportation Security Act. While the TSA's mandate extends to all types of aircraft, scheduled passenger aircraft have received disproportionate emphasis, largely reflecting the events on September 11 and congressio nal direction. The Silent Vector exercise was not intended to explore the weaknesses in aviation security. In the course of preparation for the exercise, however, CSIS analysts determined that general aviation and air cargo operations still represent substantial vulnerabilities. CSIS created an imaginary "terrorist cell" to map out a realistic plan to commandeer three large corporate-style general aviation aircraft for purposes of mounting an attack. The notional plans were vetted both with the general aviation industry and with the law enforcement community to insure plausibility and credibility. The exercise "terrorists" established, over a period of months, a credit history with a charter aircraft company in California, by placing a series of charter contracts using increasingly larger aircraft. The terrorists also established a cover company that was hired to locate and survey potential property sites for real estate investors. On the target exercise date, the company representatives were not challenged when they placed a charter request for three G-5­type aircraft. Independent engineering analysis confirmed that these aircraft,

4

Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

when flown into chemical storage facilities, would have caused the release of significant quantities of harmful aerosolized chemicals.

Roundtable Findings
CSIS assembled a panel of experts in the field of aviation security. 4 Admiral James Loy outlined the steps that the TSA has taken to comply with the statutory requirements imposed by Congress. The new security procedures for commercial passenger aircraft are well known. The physical inspection procedure is in place, and air marshals now routinely fly on commercial flights. TSA has established security review procedures for airport and air support personnel. The TSA made initial improvements in the existing computerized passenger screening software system and has launched an ambitious new Computer Assisted Passenger Profiling System 2 (CAPPS 2). 5 Although much of the system is still in development, the architecture of security procedures and systems for commercial passenger aviation is in place. TSA is still developing the concepts and procedures for stronger security for cargo and charter aviation, to include general aviation. Although commercial passenger aviation security has been a massive challenge, it is relatively straightforward compared to cargo and general aviation. The scope and diversity of cargo and general aviation is daunting. There are over 400 air carriers of record, with over 3,200 airports in the system. For general aviation, there are over 218,000 aircraft and 136,000 registered pilots. More often than not, general aviation air facilities have only minimal security features. The TSA has attempted to identify practical solutions to such a complex business environment. TSA has initiated a "known shipper" program that maps the supply chains, noting the trusted agents in those supply chains. Shipments that come from entities that are not recognized in the known shipper program presumably will receive greater attention. TSA has instituted tougher regulations concerning students in flight schools, requiring special background checks for individuals seeking training in aircraft weighing more than 12,500 pounds. It should be emphasized that the current system is not without significant security precautions. General aviation aircraft represent substantial investments. Owners, investors, and indemnifiers have insisted on security procedures to safeguard these assets. It is also important to note that the operational culture for cargo and general aviation is separated from the general traveling public, making tactical surveillance by potential terrorists inherently more observable.

Two Key Problems--Compromised Employees and "False Flag" Consumers
Roundtable participants noted that there has been little improvement in two areas that constitute arguably the easiest avenue for would-be terrorists to seize cargo
4 5

Aviation security roundtable participants are listed in appendix C. CAPPS 2 has sparked concerns about privacy, and significant deployment constraints have been imposed on the program until Congress can address the privacy concerns.

Center for Strategic and International Studies 5

and general aviation aircraft--compromised employees and "false flag" consumers. Roundtable participants concluded that a likely and serious avenue for potential terrorist elements would be through compromised employees working for air transportation companies or in the aviation support and services sector. While this is a significant number of individuals, it represents a smaller screening challenge than the TSA is currently facing with real-time passenger screening for commercial air operations. The TSA has established a goal to aggregate the "watch lists" that are developed by various elements of the security community in order to test for potential matches with commercial passengers. This procedure can and should be routinely used to match potential suspects who are employees or operators in cargo and general aviation. Since only a small subset of general aviation represents aircraft that could do considerable damage if flown into a facility, the task is further simplified in terms of screening the aircraft and the operators of larger aircraft. The false flag consumer is a more difficult issue. The scenario used in Silent Vector highlighted this problem. In the scenario, the terrorists posed as legitimate businessmen who needed to charter aircraft from commercial services. The would-be terrorists chartered aircraft of increasing size over an extended period, always paying promptly. Their cover story was plausible, so it did not raise suspicions among charter operators. In general, the roundtable participants noted that there is inadequate "situational awareness" in the cargo and general aviation area. In its current form, the basic aircraft registry maintained by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) is not useful for tactical security operations. Over 40 percent of the registry lists the "owner" as a bank that holds title to the aircraft. Such data is meaningful for regulatory purposes, but it is not helpful for real- time security emergencies. Roundtable participants noted that current data aggregation procedures should permit the development of a tactically useful registry using data from widely available sources. Informatio n assembled from dozens of disparate databases could be brought together quickly and could permit preventative analytic procedures. The problem posed by the false flag consumer is that it does not fall into a normal regulatory activity of the government. The government can impose identity checks on employees of companies that need to secure a government license to operate aircraft. But in the case of a false flag consumer, we are confronted by the need to impose a security obligation on a private company that is extended to a third party in a purely commercial transaction. Though we have analogous obligations elsewhere (for example, commercial banks are required to submit special reports to the government on any individual who deposits or withdraws more than $10,000 in cash), an obligation for a private company to conduct a background investigation on another private entity is strongly resisted in today's business culture.

6

Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Roundtable participants believed that the most important function of the federal government is to be able to inform the aviation industry of plausible likely threats, not generic hypothetical warnings. Many of the warnings being issued by the government are too general and too vague to be helpful. The federal government needs to strengthen its abilities to gain more concrete warning information and to pass that information on to the aviation industry. Roundtable participants questioned the value of nonspecific, generic, hypothetical threat information. At the same time, though, the ability of the intelligence community to obtain more tactically usable information is also constrained.

Recommendations
In partnership with the relevant stakeholders in the aviation industry, TSA is developing a plan to address security gaps in air cargo, air charter, and general aviation. The roundtable participants noted the following areas for priority action: § TSA should pursue a threat-based, risk- management approach to aid in the prioritization of efforts. Though there is a huge number of private aircraft in the United States, few pose catastrophic risk if used by a terrorist. TSA's strategy should focus initially on larger aircraft and initially on larger facilities. TSA should place highest priority on assembling an integrated watch list, based on the various watch lists developed by the security agencies of the federal government. This integrated watch list should be the starting point for situational awareness and should be used to corroborate the bona fides of all employees of aircraft service and support companies. The FAA and the TSA should update their aircraft registry system, placing first priority on assembling commercially available data from a wide range of sources so as to develop a "virtual" registry database that is useful for law enforcement purposes in emergency situations. The FAA and the TSA should develop a positive identification system for all aircraft operators over a specified takeoff weight class. The positive identification system should eventually involve biometric-based identification that can be readily corroborated against the integrated watch list discussed above. Before being granted a pilot certificate, all prospective candidates should be screened against the integrated watch list. For charter and, eventually for general aviation, all manifest passengers should be checked against CAPPS 2 as is the eventual case with all commercial passenger aircraft. CAPPS 2 should be designed so that it is primarily comparing prospective passengers against the integrated watch lists of suspect individuals.

§

§

§

§ §

II. Issues of Concern in Nuclear Power Plant Security
The Silent Vector exercise examined the specific challenges that flow from a credible but indeterminate threat of an attack against critical infrastructure. The

Center for Strategic and International Studies 7

CSIS threat- vulnerability matrix aided the hypothetical NSC in their evaluation of the range of risks we face and the consequences that might flow from an attack against each sector. Because of the prominent role that nuclear power plays in American society and the psychological and destructive impact of a nuclear release, it was presumed by game participants to be a likely target of an attack. 6 Particularly since the emergency at Three Mile Island in 1979, many Americans are deeply apprehensive about nuclear power plants. Citizens who oppose nuclear power tend to seize any opportunity to raise local anxiety about the safety of local power plants. In the aftermath of September 11, we have heard many calls for shutting down nuclear power plants, especially the now- famous Indian Point reactor located approximately 40 miles from Manhattan Island.

Roundtable Findings
CSIS analysts studied nuclear power plant safety in considerable detail in preparation for the simulation. Analysts met extensively with representatives from the nuclear industry and the government to examine all aspects of nuclear plant security. In general terms, nuclear power plants have relatively sophisticated security systems that are designed to protect against willful disruption. Other elements of critical infrastructure usua lly have security systems and procedures designed to limit the extent of accidents on site. By contract, nuclear power plants have security features and procedures that anticipate hostile action as well as accidental phenomena. Nuclear power facilities can be quickly rendered operation safe within seconds of credible warning. CSIS analysis examined three general modes of attack--aircraft attack, truck bombs, and assault teams. Aircraft attack. CSIS analysts reviewed three alternative studies that examined the possibility of aircraft attack along the lines of the 9/11. The Nuclear Energy Institute, the Nuclear Control Institute, and the International Atomic Energy Agency conducted the studies. The studies concluded that under very specific conditions, it might be possible for a large (767-equivalent) aircraft to penetrate the pressure vessel, but only a modest release of radiation would be expected and would trigger safe shutdown procedures. The plants were judged resistant to penetration by smaller aircraft. These studies also examined the vulnerability of the large cooling ponds that store spent fuel rods. The studies concluded that it would be extremely difficult to land aircraft in the cooling ponds and would not likely cause the tanks to lose the cooling water covering the spent fuel rods. CSIS analysts did learn of a specific vulnerability that is currently being addressed by the industry. (CSIS agreed to treat this information as classified and will not relay this vulnerability in public documents.) Truck bombs. Physical security features and procedures would largely render truck bombs ineffective against containment vessels. Even if a truck bomb were detonated adjacent to a pressure vessel, it is unlikely that it would penetrate the containment vessel. A truck bomb could, in theory, destroy the control room of a nuclear power plant in certain cases. But this is a threat that security teams have
6

Nuclear power roundtable participants are listed in Appendix D.

8

Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

anticipated with various procedures and physical barriers. A case-by-case threat assessment would be required to fully resolve this risk, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission is undertaking such an assessment of that risk. Assault teams. Critics have charged that nuclear power plants are susceptible to attack by teams of terrorists. This is a scenario incorporated into the so-called design basis threat against which current security procedures are measured. Such an attack would trigger shutdown procedures and would be unlikely to cause major release of radioactive elements. Again, this represents a threat for which detailed planning has been made in each location.

Recommendations
§ Nuclear power plants are among the most security-conscious facilities in the United States. Each has installed extensive threat protection features. Clearly, standards can weaken over time, so it is crucial to continue to exercise vigilance over security procedures for these facilities both within the industry and by its regulators. Because of the extensive security procedures in place at nuclear facilities, an active program of public awareness on security procedures should be conducted. A public awareness campaign would help to reassure residents in neighboring communities that procedures are in place. An active public information program on security and safety procedures would also help to deter would-be terrorists by communicating that nuclear power plants are relatively "hard" facilities and that the chance of success in an attack against such facilities is inherently limited. The Nuclear Regulatory Commission should undertake prompt remediation procedures on the one security threat that CSIS researchers discovered during the course of preparation for the Silent Vector exercise. The security procedures CSIS adopted in association with the exercise preclude us from discussing this one risk dimension in any public document. Compromised insiders represent a potential vulnerability to safe operation of nuclear power facilities. All employees at nuclear power facilities should be screened against an integrated watch list to determine whether or not individuals are suspect or have affiliation patterns with watch list suspects.

§

§

§

III. Issues of Concern in the Homeland Security Threat Advisory and National Warning System
During the Silent Vector exercise, role players grappled with several decisions associated with informing the public about the threat of an uncertain attack, exploring the fault lines that exist between public- and private-sector responsibilities and capabilities. One objective was to determine what state and national leaders could do in the face of an increasingly likely terrorist attack to prepare citizens and those industries potentially affected by such an incident. As

Center for Strategic and International Studies 9

the simulation progressed, it became clear that notifying the public and private industries in this type of situation would be much more complicated than simply raising the threat level on the color-code Homeland Security Advisory System. Warnings need to be tailored to specific areas and instructions on protective action responses provided. During the exercise, for example, the "governor of Virginia" ordered an evacuation of the public from the vicinity of a chemical facility mentioned in intelligence reports, while federal officials were reluctant to act on what was uncorroborated information. Meanwhile, in New York, individuals evacuated spontaneously (i.e., without official warning) upon hearing news of a plane crash in the vicinity of the Three Mile Island nuclear plant.

Roundtable Findings
The roundtable brought together key experts on warning: Dr. Peter Ward, founder of the Partnership for Public Warning; Gil Jamieson, director of the Office of National Preparedness at the Department of Homeland Security/Federal Emergency Management Administration; Frank Cilluffo, counselor to the Center for the Study of the Presidenc y and former Office of Homeland Security official; and Charles Vollmer, president and CEO of VII, Inc. 7 The roundtable discussion focused on efforts to upgrade the current national warning system, warning dissemination devices for the public, and potential means of improving public warning. One of the key lessons from the Silent Vector exercise and the follow-on roundtable discussion is that the federal Homeland Security Advisory System (HLSAS) launched in March 2002 is not a reliable warning mechanism for the private sector or the general public. Governments at all levels (federal, state, and local) use the HLSAS to trigger increases and decreases in security posture. Businesses and private citizens are largely unaware of what actions they should take when the threat level changes. Although some higher-risk industries may institute response procedures, these are entirely voluntary, and there is no guarantee that the federal alert system would activate them. The roundtable discussion quickly focused on semant ic problems that confuse policymakers and members of the public alike. The terms "warning," "watch," "advisory," and "alert" all mean different things in different contexts and are poorly understood. One result is that the HLSAS is often described (and criticized) as a warning system. In the professional disaster response lexicon, however, "warning" refers to information provided to those at risk--in advance of (alert) or during (notification) a hazardous event--that induces them to take specific and appropriate protective actions to reduce losses. By this standard, it is clear that the HLSAS is not designed as a warning system since it does not provide specific protective actions to particular at-risk populations. Terrorist attacks require a shift in thinking about warning. Unlike the Cold War where officials anticipated a period of rising tensions to provide strategic warning, and could anticipate receiving tactical warning from sensor systems,
7

Threat advisory and warning system roundtable participants are listed in Appendix E.

10 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

allowing a short window for response and protective actions, terrorist attacks are designed to surprise. In some sense, the HLSAS serves a strategic warning function, forecasting a period of higher tensions and potential vulnerability. Tactical warning of terrorist attacks is much harder to achieve in light of the limitations of intelligence collection. Thus in many cases, advance warning may not be possible. On September 11, for example, Americans learned about the terror attacks through the media or by word of mouth. In some cases, warning was provided by the victims of the strike themselves. In today's threat environment, warnings may take place during and immediately following a terrorist incident, rather than in advance. The most important part of such warnings is to provide recommendations on protective actions that individuals can take even as an event is underway. If the aim of warnings is to save lives and reduce the costs of disasters, the challenge is to provide targeted warnings to people at risk, 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with specific actions to take in a crisis. How can governments provide targeted warnings to people at constant risk--in their homes, on the street, at school, at work, or in transit? No single communication system will suffice. The good news is that technology is on our side; virtually any communication device is potentially able to broadcast warnings. The bad news is that an overall system design for warnings, standards for warnings, and coordination between public and private stakeholders is lacking. Today, warnings occur via a complex public-private arrangement in which multiple federal agencies, state and local governments, emergency managers, and responders all issue warnings of various types. Meanwhile, the private sector owns the receivers and broadcast systems necessary to provide warnings--whether via radio, television, the Internet, or mobile devices such as cell phones and pagers--but it lacks the authority and necessary expertise to issue warnings (and does not want the associated liability). As highlighted in the discussion, America's national warning capabilities are not up to date. Although an Emergency Alert System (EAS) exists for the president to address the nation, it was not activated on September 11, nor was it ever activated for presidential use during the four-decade- long Cold War. The EAS operates as a multilevel system, involving cable systems and radio and television stations across the United States. As a condition to receive a broadcasting license, stations must obtain necessary EAS equipment and agree to broadcast warnings if required by the president. On a voluntary basis, broadcasters can also elect to provide warnings issued at state and local levels (e.g., by emergency management officials, governors, police, etc.). One of the benefits of the EAS is that it can be broadcast to a small subsection of the U.S. population, down to the county level or even to a portion of a county. This allows tailored warnings to those at risk rather than the entire nation. It does not, of course, reach those without access to radio or television. The EAS relies on voluntary participation and support from the broadcast industry, state and local officials, and volunteers. States determine their own level

Center for Strategic and International Studies 11

of funding and system support. No federal entity requires the development of state plans on how to formulate and pass EAS messages to the public. As a result, EAS national effectiveness is uneven. State- level plans exist and are actively used in states prone to natural disasters such as California and Florida. A number of other states have no such plans, however. Additionally, few state and local emergency managers have the necessary equipment to add their own warnings into EAS, and many public safety and law enforcement officials do not know about the EAS and its functionality. There are a variety of technologies that can provide warnings to the American public. Radio and TV are the most widespread, though many other communication devices such as the Internet, wireless devices (e.g., pagers, cell phones), and new telephone-based capabilities (e.g., reverse 911) are able to carry warnings. But these newer channels are not currently linked in a comprehensive system. Each possible warning device has its own advantages and drawbacks in terms of broadcast range, penetration among consumers, and type of power source. Most devices have to be turned on or in use in order to receive warnings, affecting the potential penetration of warnings to the public. This gap highlights the need for a layered approach to warnings that also makes use of devices that have an ability to "waken" when activated by EAS codes. The time lag involved in issuing warnings is another challenge to overcome, whether for a terrorist event or a natural disaster. As the Silent Vector exercise illustrated, officials go through a cognitive process of hearing, understanding, and believing threat information before determining that a response is warranted. They must become aware of an event or a pending event through intelligence information, detection devices, or the media. This is followed by some form of confirmation and a decisionmaking process on whether to inform the public and, if so, what message to provide. Disaster research surveys have shown that officials are often slow in reaching decisions, which can prevent timely warnings to the public. In contrast, informal (unofficial) notification among households and colleagues can take place on a much faster timeline, unhindered by liability concerns and the need to make pronouncements about the optimal protective action to pursue.

Recommendations
The roundtable participants produced a number of important insights on how to improve the ability of officials at all levels of government--federal, state, and local--to issue warnings throughout a terrorist crisis, working in collaboration with the private sector: § The HLSAS should be recognized and judged for what it is--an advisory system--rather than as a method for transmitting warnings. The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) needs to clarify in its dialogue with the public and private sectors that the HLSAS is not the way that individual Americans will be warned in the event of a terrorist attack.

12 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

§

The federal government must develop and promulgate a national warning strategy to guide both public- and private-sector efforts to improve warnings for all hazards, including terrorism. In the absence of such guidance, the private sector will continue to move forward on its own in an uncoordinated fashion, with businesses proceeding to sell solutions where viable. The beginnings of such a strategy already exist in the form of a strategy document developed by the Partnership for Public Warning (PPW). The strategy incorporates inputs from a large number of stakeholders, including relevant federal officials and private-sector companies. It calls for a national all- hazards warning system, including common hazards terminology, standard message protocols, national metrics and standards, and a national system for collecting and disseminating warnings from all sources. 8 The Department of Homeland Security should be clearly designated as the lead for warnings related to terrorist attacks. Senators John Edwards (DN.C.) and Fritz Hollings (D-S.C.) proposed legislation to this effect in January 2003--the Emergency Warning Act of 2003. 9 This would give DHS responsibility for developing uniform warning standards and issuing warnings related to acts of terrorism. The Department of Commerce would have the responsibility for developing new warning technologies. The secretary of homeland security should receive authority to activate the EAS. This would provide flexibility in the event that the president cannot be reached quickly or is unavailable for immediate consultation regarding a breaking crisis, thus allowing for more timely warnings. To be effective, any new or updated warning system must provide a layered approach to allow for redundancy in the event of failure of some components and to addresses all segments of the U.S. population, including linguistic minorities, people with disabilities, institutional populations, and those who lack access to common warning technologies for economic reasons. DHS should establish and provide necessary funding for a public-private partnership, which is necessary to bridge the gap between privately held communications channels and publicly provided warnings. Such a partnership must address private-sector concerns about liability, agreement on standards and formats, and the need for specialized training for media communicators in a crisis situation. DHS and the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) should work together to reach agreement on making development of state and local EAS plans mandatory rather than voluntary. They should also negotiate with broadcasters to insure that all state and local terrorist-related

§

§

§

§

§

8 9

Available at http://www.partnershipforpublicwarning.org. Draft "Emergency Warning Act of 2003," S118, 108th Congress, 1st Session. The draft is available at http://thomas.loc.gov.

Center for Strategic and International Studies 13

warnings would be broadcast; currently only presidential messages are mandatory.

IV. Issues of Concern in Chemical Operations Security
Although the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, had nothing to do with the chemical industry, they starkly highlighted the vulnerability of a range of key and dangerous facilities. The Silent Vector exercise underscored the fact that the chemical industry is highly vulnerable to the threats it is most likely to face. The United States is the world's largest consumer of chemicals, petrochemicals, and their by-products, and their wide distribution and use in American society makes their protection very difficult. According to the General Accounting Office (GAO), there are at least 123 chemical facilities within the United States, which could each produce 1 million casualties if attacked. This represents a major area of concern, and very little progress has been made in securing this critical industry. Although their goals and preferred methods are often at odds, the risk to chemical production and storage operations is a topic of major concern to government and industry alike. Silent Vector participants quickly focused on chemical facilities as perhaps the most vulnerable and potentially most destructive targets in a terrorist attack. The chemical industry presents a very complex control problem because of the multiple producers, transporters, and storage locations, both public and private, spread across the nation. Because chemical plant security focuses on preventing and reacting to an accidental release of toxic chemicals, a release or spill from a terrorist attack would likely be much larger and therefore more harmful than anything an accident could produce. Exercise participants wrestled with multiple issues such as site vulnerabilities, potential casualties in neighboring population centers, security contingencies, and federal versus state responsibilities, ultimately determining that the chemical industry is easily among the most problematic of all the possible terrorist infrastructure targets.

Roundtable Findings
CSIS assembled experts in the field of chemical industry security. 10 A panel of four speakers offered comments as a basis for general discussion: Jerry Hauer, acting assistant secretary of public health emergency preparedness, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services; Peter Jutro, counselor to the administrator for the Environmental Protection Agency, for environment and security, and deputy director of the National Homeland Security Research Center; Mark A. Scott, president and CEO of the National Institute for Chemical Studies; and Peg Reese, assistant director for Natural Resources and Environment at the U.S. General Accounting Office. Some of the questions the panel was asked to address were: What can be done to secure the industry as a whole? Where is the boundary in terms of privatesector­public-sector responsibility? Do federal, state, and local plans exist to
10

Chemical operations security roundtable participants are listed in appendix F.

14 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

insure public warnings and effective augmentation of chemical plant security in the event of a real contingency or security threat? Should chemical facilities be required to rework their risk- management plans (RMPs) to include the possibility of terrorism? What would be the impact on the industry? Roundtable participants noted that chemical facilities present an attractive target for terrorists intent on causing massive damage. Although authorities have warned of the terrorist threat to chemical facilities for a number of years and have concluded that the risk of an attempt in the foreseeable future is both real and credible, no one has comprehensively assessed the security across the nation at facilities that house chemicals--even though federal laws explicitly require that chemical facilities assess vulnerabilities or safeguard their facilities from attack. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) believes that the Clean Air Act provisions could be interpreted to provide authority for government involvement; however, EPA has thus far not attempted to use these provisions. EPA's riskmanagement program does impose requirements on about 15,000 facilities around the country, but EPA has concluded that chemical facility security would be more effectively addressed by passage of specific legislation and by explicitly assigning responsibility for chemical industry security to the Department of Homeland Security. Of particular concern to some in the industry are those proposals that would impose new risk- mitigation requirements on the chemical industry, which is already feeling the effects of high energy costs. These observers believe that the consequences of any such action would be devastating in light of the dependence on chemicals of virtually every sector of the American economy, as well as the narrow profit margins in the chemical industry itself. These views are based on several factors, including: (1) the existing high costs of both energy and selfimposed chemical industry security measures; (2) the risk of acceleration of recent trends shifting chemical operations toward other countries that offer lower costs and constraints; (3) the economic impact of further reduction in domestic chemical operations, affecting millions of locations and related interests, such as transportation and agriculture; and (4) the consequences of a societal paradigm shift from an "open society" toward a less desirable "closed society." Industry proponents, in general, believe that the nation's industries should be encouraged to adopt self- imposed security mechanisms that utilize an asymmetric, creative approach based on individual responsibilities. Others outside the industry are wary that this voluntary approach will result in uneven standards and little action. In February 2003, the White House released recommendations that would require both the EPA and DHS to identify critical facilities and require industry to draft a security plan to minimize terrorist exposure. For the chemical industry, this poses a difficult, if not impossible, task in attempting to devise site security procedures that would be practical and effective for the full range of chemical facilities. Since the Bhopal, India, chemical catastrophe in 1984, a stronger crisis response capability in the United States for dealing with chemical emergencies

Center for Strategic and International Studies 15

now exists, but much remains to be done. A major concern is not so much the security of chemicals themselves, but the process of educating employees in correct responses to shut down production sites in the event of an attack in order to limit, to the extent possible, fatalities in surrounding communities. Another area of significant progress since Bhopal is that of community "right to know." It is essential to develop a national deliberative dialogue on how to balance right to know and homeland security in the chemical sector, as in many others, because much harm can be done both to the public trust and to homeland security requirements if a balance between the two is not achieved. The public is now much more educated on chemical risks, particularly in communities where significant chemical facilities are located. According to the National Institute for Chemical Studies, a nonprofit organization funded from the settlement proceeds of the Bhopal disaster, the chemical industry in general is doing a better job now in developing the trust of local communities through education and outreach programs. The American Chemistry Council (ACC) is an example of an effective industry trade association, but its membership of 150 is far from universal. Further, compliance with ACC standards is not legally mandated, although adherence to its Responsible Care Security Code to enhance plant security is a requirement of membership. The ACC has undertaken a number of securityrelated initiatives, but they actually only affect a very small proportion of the chemical industry because commercial fragmentation, rather than consolidation, is the norm in the industry. Security and safety measures at major facilities belonging to large corporations tend to be robust, apparent, and clear. However, at smaller, independent operations, security is often more lax. Transportation of chemicals is also a very serious and complex problem. Large-capacity chemical transport trucks routinely travel all over the country, including through major population centers, with little or no security. Efforts to educate and screen drivers are in very preliminary phases. The same applies to rail transport of large quantities of highly toxic chemicals. Terrorist groups cannot help but have noted this extremely weak spot in the system, to include the 2001 train accident in a Baltimore, Maryland, tunnel involving toxic chlorine gas. The chemical industry in the United States has thus far been spared intense public scrutiny because there has not been a major catastrophic chemical event on U.S. soil. However, if a chemical accident or terrorist attack killing large numbers of people were to occur, the consequences for the industry and for government could be severe. The public would want to know why industry did not do more to protect itself and why government did not require it to do so.

Recommendations
Despite all efforts since the events of September 11, 2001, to protect the nation from terrorism, the extent of security preparedness at U.S. chemical facilities is unknown, according to a recently released GAO study. No federal requirements are in place to require chemical facilities to assess their vulnerabilities and take steps to reduce them, and no federal oversight or third-party verification ensures

16 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

that voluntary industry assessments are adequate and that necessary corrective actions are taken. The secretary of homeland security and the administrator of the EPA should jointly develop, in consultation with the Homeland Security Council, a comprehensive national chemical security strategy that is both practical and cost effective. Roundtable participants suggested, at a minimum, that the national strategy should: § § § § Identify high-risk facilities based on factors including the level of threat and collect information on industry security preparedness; Specify the roles and responsibilities of each federal agency partnering with the chemical industry; Develop appropriate information-sharing mechanisms; and Develop a legislative proposal, in consultation with industry and other appropriate groups, to require chemical facilities to expeditiously assess their vulnerability to terrorist attacks and, where necessary, require these facilities to take corrective action.

V. Concluding Observations
During the course of the Silent Vector seminar series, several crosscutting issues emerged in the discussions among the roundtable participants that have important bearing on the future of America's efforts to promote homeland security. We conclude this review by briefly summarizing the scope of these issues and their significance for our collective efforts to bring effective security to America's homeland.

Balancing "Right to Know" with "Obligation to Protect"
One of the great homeland security challenges is the need to find the right balance between two important public objectives. On the one hand, Americans want to know that the government will protect citizens against terrorist acts. On the other, Americans have come to expect a right to know what is happening in neighborhood enterprises and activities that pose potential risk in an emergency. Americans have become apprehensive about the danger inherent in local facilities such as chemical plants, petroleum refineries, storage facilities, and nuclear power plants. During the past two-dozen years, local resistance to such critical facilities has grown sharply. Critics of nuclear power, for example, have stimulated major controversy at virtually every nuclear power plant in the country. Operational emergencies are seen as major crises to local communities, primed with fear by vocal opponents in the area. Facility managers have had to develop strategies to deal with the apprehensions of local communities. The key strategy for local managers is visibility. Managers have learned that local citizens' apprehension grows with ignorance of what happens inside such facilities and of security procedures in the face of emergencies. Managers of chemical facilities, for example, are pressured

Center for Strategic and International Studies 17

to disclose publicly what chemicals are produced in plants and what procedures are in place for emergency response. Often this information is posted on company Web sites in an effort to provide reassuring transparency. During the aftermath of 9/11, however, local security officials have questioned whether or not such information should be made publicly available. Does it not offer insights to terrorists to know what potentially hazardous materials are housed within these facilities? Is it wise to outline emergency response procedures on an open Web site? Roundtable participants concluded that this tension between "right to know" and "obligation to protect" cannot be resolved in the abstract. Both are legitimate societal goals in civic life. The need to block knowledge to impede the work of terrorists today must be balanced by the need to reassure citizens that their safety is being actively addressed by managers of critical facilities. Today, the debate is dominated too much by unreasoned fear of terrorism. Information that has been routinely available for years in public outreach programs is now being blocked for the sake of homeland security. We believe that such steps are counterproductive. Withholding important information about local facilities only serves to reinforce the fear of local citizens. Certainly all public outreach programs and information should be carefully assessed, but blanket removal of such information is counterproductive to Americans' long-term confidence that a reasoned balance has been struck between protection and safety.

"Safety"--the Appropriate Starting Point for "Security"?
In every one of the sectors we studied, it was apparent that homeland security procedures have been extended from the safety procedures developed to cope with local emergencies. A central responsibility of management is to determine how to anticipate and mitigate the effects of accidents or natural disasters. Every complex modern facility has detailed procedures designed to contain damage and to minimize collateral impact on neighbors. But is this the best starting point for homeland security preparations? Roundtable participants were divided on this assessment. Clearly safety procedures have been established because they reinforce the inherent value of preservation responsibilities of managers. Managers are entrusted with the safe operation of facilities that cost hundreds of millions, even billions of dollars. Safety procedures reflect good business practices and the expectations of investors who have placed their money in the face of anticipatable risk. But terrorism is not like randomized accidents or natural emergencies. Terrorist strikes, by contrast, are intentional and focused, designed for maximum catastrophic impact. It is not practical or logical to anticipate every method of attack and protect against them absolutely. Businessmen will manage predictable risk, but they are understandably wary of making serious investments to mitigate intentional unpredictability.

18 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Roundtable participants argued that a disciplined approach to define and "manage" risk would assist with the challenge of designing homeland security procedures for critical facilities. A safety mindset requires a disciplined approach to potential risk, judging both the likelihood of the hazard and the consequences of the event. Careful risk assessment also leads to a disciplined mitigation plan. In some instances the risk is simply accepted, usually because the likelihood and the expected consequences are at opposite extremes of the spectrum (for example, the hazard is judged catastrophic, but the risk of occurrence is considered remote). More often, the risk is categorized and arrayed against a mix of facility construction, process design, operating procedures, and indemnification to strike a balance that is seen as most cost effective, given the likelihood and consequences of the event. Roundtable participants believe this same disciplined process would be profitable if introduced into homeland security preparations.

Commercial Incentives Compared to Security Imperatives
The third crosscutting issue to emerge during our seminars was the question of the tension between commercial incentives and the imperative for security. In the United States, most critical infrastructure resides in the private sector. We favor this approach because of the inherent efficiency that comes from a marketplace philosophy. Managers that address the demands of the marketplace most effectively are those who profit most handsomely compared to competitors. This philosophy, however, makes potentially hazardous materials relatively accessible to the general public. Consider the neighborhood gasoline station. Gasoline is a highly dangerous product. Suppliers have designed safe facilities and procedures. These facilities, by definition, are made highly accessible to the buying public. But any gasoline station, if attacked by a terrorist, would create a spectacular, if highly localized, event. This is just an example, but the principle applies more generally. Hazardous chemicals are widely available in America, though it does take some specialized knowledge to know how to acquire them and how to purchase them without raising suspicions. Such actions can be accomplished, however, with disciplined preparation. The root cause of this tension between the commercial incentives for easy access and the security imperative is found in the fact that most critical infrastructure is placed in the private sector and is usually regulated by the government only for safety. We do not choose to change the basic formula for private ownership. So what options do we have? It is important to note that the more accessible the product or service, the more likely is the vendor of that product or service to design safety features that mitigate collateral damage caused by accidents. The basic marketplace management of risk is probably the best and arguably probably the only approach available to deal with this inherent problem.

Center for Strategic and International Studies 19

Conclusion
One theme runs throughout these concluding observations. In both general and specific terms, homeland security needs to be a disciplined process that balances risk, cost, and probability. It cannot be accomplished in the abstract through fiat. It must be the product of specific management discipline. The federal government has an obligation to promote a disciplined approach to homeland security, one that is adopted by the private sector because it is balanced and reasoned. We are currently a far distance from this sensible approach, but the trends are in the right direction.

20 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Appendix A. Silent Vector Role Players
President Governor of Virginia Secretary of State Secretary of Defense Secretary of Homeland Security Secretary of Energy Attorney General National Security Adviser Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Director, CIA Director, FBI Deputy Director, FBI Director, FEMA Director, Nuclear Regulatory Commission Director, Homeland Security President's Press Secretary Director, National Economic Council Sam Nunn James S. Gilmore Fred C. Iklé John P. White James M. Loy Charles B. Curtis George J. Terwilliger III R. James Woolsey Wesley K. Clark Winston Wiley William S. Sessions Dale Watson James Lee Witt Shirley Ann Jackson Jerome M. Hauer Dee Dee Myers Stephen Friedman

Center for Strategic and International Studies 21

Appendix B. Threat-Vulnerability Matrix

22 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Appendix C. Aviation Security Roundtable Participants
January 17, 2003
Leslie E. Adlam, Assistant Director of Legislative Affairs, TSA Philip Anderson, Senior Fellow, CSIS Edward M. Bolen, President & CEO, GAMA Phil Boyer, President, AOPA Joseph Cramer, Manager, Government and Regulatory Affairs, Rockwell Collins Charles B. Curtis, President and COO, NTI Stephen Davis, Navy Fellow, CSIS Mary DeRosa, Senior Fellow, CSIS Richard Dunn, Northrop Grumman Amr A. El Sawy, Senior Vice President and General Manager, MITRE/CAASD Daniel Fata, Senior Policy Adviser, House Republican Policy Committee James S. Gilmore, Partner, Kelley, Drye & Warren LLP Garrick Groves, Professional Staff, Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs John J. Hamre, President & CEO, CSIS Gary Holland, Air Force Fellow, CSIS Brian Kelley, Coast Guard Fellow, CSIS Randall J. Larsen, Director, Homeland Security Institute, ANSER James M. Loy, Under Secretary of Transportation for Security, TSA Edward McGaffigan, Commissioner, NRC David McIntyre, Deputy Director, Research, ANSER Tammy Miracle, Army National Guard Fellow, CSIS Cynthia Pettitt, Research Associate, CSIS Thomas Sanderson, Fellow, CSIS Paul Schreiber, Marine Corps Fellow, CSIS William S. Sessions, Partner, Holland & Knight, LLP John C. Stammreich, Vice President, Homeland Security, Phantom Works, Boeing Company Ronald Swanda, Vice President, Operations, GAMA Todd Swearingen, Special Assistant, Transportation Department Barry Valentine, Senior Vice President, International Affairs, GAMA

Center for Strategic and International Studies 23

Charles D. Vollmer, President & CEO, VII Inc. Pete West, Senior Vice President, NBAA Anne Witkowsky, Senior Fellow, CSIS R. James Woolsey, Vice President, Booz Allen Hamilton

24 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Appendix D. Nuclear Power Plant Security Roundtable Participants
February 20, 2003
Philip Anderson, Senior Fellow, CSIS Koren Bell, James Lee Witt Associates John C. Brons, Special Assistant to the President, Nuclear Energy Institute Christopher G. Caine, Vice President of Governmental Programs, IBM Corp. Charles B. Curtis, President & COO, Nuclear Threat Initiative Stephen Davis, Navy Fellow, CSIS Daniel P. Fata, Senior Policy Adviser, House Republican Policy Committee Charles Ferguson, Scientist-in-Residence, Monterey Institute Michal Freedhoff, Senior Policy Associate, Office of Rep. Edward Markey John J. Hamre, President & CEO, CSIS Gary Holland, Air Force Fellow, CSIS Brian Kelley, Coast Guard Fellow, CSIS Michael Levi, Director, Strategic Security, Federation of American Scientists Edward McGaffigan Jr., Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory Commission Tammy Miracle, Army National Guard Fellow, CSIS R. Nicholas Palarino, Senior Policy Analyst, House Government Reform Committee Timothy Sample, Majority Staff Director, House Intelligence Committee Peter Stockton, Senior Investigator, Project on Government Oversight Roy Zimmerman, Director, Office of Nuclear Security & Incident Response, Nuclear Regulatory Commission

Center for Strategic and International Studies 25

Appendix E. Homeland Security Threat Advisory and National Warning Roundtable Participants
March 27, 2003
Ken Allen, Executive Director, Partnership for Public Warning Philip Anderson, Senior Fellow, CSIS Craig Bambrough, American Management Systems Koren Bell, James Lee Witt Associates Irene Brahmakulam, RAND John C. Brons, Special Assistant to the President, Nuclear Energy Institute Christopher G. Caine, Vice President, Governmental Programs, IBM Frank J. Cilluffo, Counselor, Center for the Study of the Presidency William R. Cumming, Principal, Vacation Lane Group Walter Curt, President & Founder, SEI Technology, Inc. Charles B. Curtis, President & COO, Nuclear Threat Initiative Elizabeth Dahan, Council on Foreign Relations Arnaud de Borchgrave, Senior Adviser, CSIS Richard Donnelly, Arlington Citizen Corps Council Amanda Dory, International Affairs Fellow, CSIS Mackenzie Eaglen, House Committee on Government Reform Dawn Eischen, Public Affairs, Virginia Department of Emergency Management Gerald L. Epstein, Scientific Adviser, DTRA James Gass, Plans and Special Projects, MIPT Elin A. Gursky, Senior Fellow for Biodefense and Public Health, ANSER Joshua Handler, Professional Staff, Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Gary Holland, Air Force Fellow, CSIS Gil Jamieson, Director, Office of National Preparedness, FEMA L. Z. Johnson, Center For Domestic Preparedness, Department Of Justice Gabe Joseph, VII Inc. Brian Kelley, Chief, Strategic and Business Planning, U.S. Coast Guard Lawrence Kocot, Senior Vice President, National Association of Chain Drug Stores Gordon Lederman, Associate, Arnold & Porter Maureen McCarthy, Chief Scientist, Department of Homeland Security

26 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

Terry McCullough, SEI Technology David McIntyre, Deputy Director, Research, ANSER Jamie Metzl, International Affairs Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations Linda Moore, Congressional Research Service John Powers, Chairman, Corporate Communication Resources Incorporated Daniel Prieto, Vice President, ZG Ventures, LLC Stephen Prior, Director, National Security, Potomac Institute for Policy Studies Tim Putprush, FEMA Linnea Raine, CSIS Shawn Reese, Government and Finance Division, CRS Kristin Robinson, Government Relations Director, NEMA Timothy Sample, Majority Staff Director, HPSCI Tom Sanderson, Fellow, CSIS Thomas Schneider, Associate, Booz Allen Hamilton Ed Staffa, National Association of Chain Drug Stores William R. Sweeney Jr., Vice President, Global Government Affairs, EDS Rick Tiene, Roam Secure, Inc. Amy Truesdell, Senior Analyst, National Security Research Bruce van Voorst, Van Voorst Associates Charles D. Vollmer, President & CEO, VII Inc. George A. Vradenburg III, Executive Vice President, AOL Peter Ward, Chairman, Partnership for Public Warning Dale L. Watson, Principal, Global Strategic Security, Booz Allen Hamilton Greg Wilmoth, Branch Chief, Plans and Programs, National Guard Bureau Christine Wormuth, Associate, Defense Forecasts International Lawrence Zelvin, Political-Military Planner, Joint Staff

Center for Strategic and International Studies 27

Appendix F. Chemical Operations Security Roundtable Participants
August 5, 2003
Jeff Bolander, Director, Plans and Strategy, SEI Technology, Inc. John C. Brons, Special Assistant to the President, Nuclear Energy Institute Robert Lee Chartrand, Senior Associate, CSIS Walter Curt, President & Founder, SEI Technology, Inc. Amanda Dory, International Affairs Fellow, CSIS Mark Gaspers, Legislative Assistant, Senate Republican Policy Committee James Gilmore, Partner, Kelley, Drye & Warren, LLP Garrick Groves, Professional Staff, Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs John J. Hamre, President & CEO, CSIS Jerome Hauer, Director, Office of Public Health Preparedness, HHS Peter Jutro, Counsellor to the Administrator, Environmental Protection Agency Morty Kaplan, Chairman, Trans-Chemical Corporation Michael Levi, Science and Technology Fellow, Brookings Institution Edward McGaffigan, Commissioner, Nuclear Regulatory Commission Robert McMullin, Army Fellow, CSIS Katherine Phillips, Research Assistant, CSIS Daniel Prieto, Professional Staff, House Select Committee on Homeland Security Peg Reese, Assistant Director, Natural Resources and Environment, GAO Mark Scott, President & CEO, National Institute for Chemical Studies William S. Sessions, Partner, Holland & Knight, LLP Chris Skaluba, House Committee on Government Reform Jan Taylor, National Institute for Chemical Studies Daniel Utech, Office of Senator John Corzine (D-N.J.) James Lee Witt, President, James Lee Witt Associates Michael Witt, Bank of Dardanelle

28 Silent Vector: Issues of Concern and Policy Recommendations

About the Silent Vector Exercise
Silent Vector was a strategic- level exercise designed to simulate possible U.S. reaction to a credible threat of a terrorist attack without sufficient information for effective prevention. The overall purpose of the exercise was to assist the administration and Congress in their attempts to improve the effectiveness of response during the pre-attack phase of a major terrorist incident. The United States operates 103 nuclear power plants, is the world's largest consumer of petrochemicals and by-products, and continues to import a disproportionate amount of oil from the Middle East. It is reasonable to assume that terrorist organizations have recognized the potential financial, industrial, and public impact of a substantive attack against American energy infrastructure. Silent Vector challenged current and former senior government leaders to respond to increasingly credible and specific intelligence indicating the possibility of a large-scale attack against critical energy and energy-related infrastructure on the East Coast of the United States.

Disclaimer
Creation of this report was supported under award number MIPT 2002J-C-002 from the Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism (MIPT) and the Office of Domestic Preparedness, U.S. Department of Homeland Security. Points of view in this document are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the official position of MIPT, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, or CSIS.

