UNITED STATES GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE

PROCUREMENT, AN0 READINESS

LOGISTICS, DIVISION

B-167790 The H'onorable Rerkley Bedell Chairman, Subcommittee on General Committee on Small Business House of Representatives Dear Mr. Chairman: Subject: National Defense Executive (GAO/PLRD-83-51) Reserve Program Oversight

As you requested on November to, 1982, we made some limited inquiries regarding the National Defense Executive Reserve (NDER) Program and on February 1, 1983, we briefed your O ffice on our findings. As agreed, we are sending you the enclosed .information presented during that briefing. The Federal Emergency Management Agency (PEMA) has placed renewed emphasis on revitalizing the program. However, recently, it did not make any significant progress towarduntil this goal. During 1982, FEW4 (1) updated regulations covering NDER activities, (2) issued new member identification cards, and (3) began work on a training plan. But we also found that o-participation in the program by Federal overall membership remain low, --recruiting --most --most --the efforts vary among agencies, regular training, agencies and

NDER units

do not conduct have specific funded,

members do.not program

job assignments, and is

is minimally

--FEWA' s central data base on program membership inaccurate and incomplete.

FEMA is generally aware of these problems and has begun actions to address some of them. Therefore, we are not making recommendations now.
(947530)

HI lllll I
120719

B-167790 we did not obtain agency.comments on this As you requested, We did, however, discuss its contents with program offireport. cials at FEMA and incorporated their views where appropriate. unless you publicly announce Ahs arrangml with your Office, its co~ntento earlier, we plan no further distribution until 10 At that time, we will send dlays from the date of this report. cctpie-s to the Chairmen , Wousie Committee on Government Operations, Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, and House and Senate Committees on Appropriations and on Armed Services? the Director, Office of Management and Budget; and the heads of the agencies participating in the program. Sincerely yours,

Donald J. Horan Director lnclosure

2

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

GAO FINDINGS ON NDER b4KKGROUND mIR is a Government-wide program which recruits business executives and other civilians to serve the Government in key ezeautive por'itions du,ring national emergencies. According to FBMA, NDER is irportalnt to Federal emergency preparedness because of the tremendous increase in Government regulation and direction of the economy and vital resources that would accompany a war emergency. This would create the need to augment the staffs of Federal agencies having emergency functions. FEMA administers and evaluates the NDER program. GAO reports issued in 1978 and 1982 noted that this program had not been very effective. _ '/ OBJECTIVES, SCOPEl AND METRODOLOGY Our objectives were to evaluate NDER plans and programs to (1) determine whether previously identified problems had been corrected and (2) review FEWA's efforts to revitalize the program. As the Subcommittee requested, we reviewed NDER program status in regard to its membership, recruitment, training, member assignments, funding, and data base adequacy. We reviewed agency NDER records and interviewed officials with WDER responsibilities at FEMA headquarters in Washington, D.C.; at the headquarters of the Departments of Commerce, Energy, Housing and Urban Development, Interior, Labor, and Transportation; at the headquarters of the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC); and at facilities of the Department of Defense (DOD). These agencies were chosen because they are the current program participants. To evaluate the adequacy of NDER reservist records, we asked FEMA to perform several computer analyses of its NDER data base. We also evaluated some records manually at participating agencies and compared some of the information they contained with similar information kept by FEMA's automated data base. Our review was performed in accordance accepted government audit standards. with generally

y"Continuity of the Federal Government in a Critical National Emergency--a Neglected Necessity" (LCD-78-409, Apr. 27, 1978) and "The Federal Cavernment Is Still Not Adequately Prepared To Respond to Major Electrical Emergencies" (GAO/EMD-82-125, Sept. 13, 1982). 3

EWCLOSURE I

ENCLOSUREI

FEWA EAS WADE SOME PROGRESS TOWARDNDER REVITALIZATION FM& has emphasized revitalizing NDER ever since that agency's form&ion in 1979. Rowever, FEMA has only recently made any significant progress toward revitalization. FbMA*s ultimate goals for the program include a total membership of 10,000 and greater participa&ion by agencies to be achieved over a period of several years. Specific objectives set by FEWA for revitalization have included: -Updating --Issuing --Beginning --Updating --Recruiting --Bolding --Designating regulations covering WDER activities. cards. plan. data base. 10,000 reservists.

new member identification work on an WDER training the membership to achieve a national records a goal of

NDER conference. for FEMA NDER reservists.

assignments

FE:RA appeared to have achieved the first three objectives by the end of 1982. However, the data base continues to have serious deficiencies; membership has not increased; and the national conference, originally scheduled for 1981, slipped to 1982 and now 1983. FEDERAL AGENCY PARTICIPATION IN NDER AWD OVERALL MEMBERSHIPREMAIN LOW FEBIA records show there are 15 NDER units, consisting of 13 units distributed among 8 civil agencies and 2 units within DOD. However, only five units are now fully operational, as indicated by asterisks in the list on the following page. Two units have only recently been formed and several others seem to be improving, but much more recruiting, planning, and training is required to make them operational.

4

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

Current membership (note a) Department of Colmeercet Office of Rmpost Administration Ohffce o'f Imd%n&trial Re=urce Administration* DOD: Amny: Wilitary Traffic Management Command mvy: Military bealift Command* Department of Energy: Blectric Power Reserve Petroleum and Gas Reserve Solid Fuelrs Reserve Depa,rtment of Rousing and Urban Development Department of the Interior: Bureau of Mines* Bmergency Water Administration Department of Labor Department of Transportation: Office of Emergency Transportation* Maritime Administration FmA* ICC Total
a/From FEMA

25 432 37

57 5
358

77 350
613 1 r=f

NDER Quarterly

Report,

Sept.

30, 1982.

Overall NDER program participation has declined, according to FEWA annual NDER reports, from 2,492 at the end of fiscal year 1979 to 1,954 at the end of fiscal year 1982. PEMA officials told us membership in some units increased slightly ,in fiscal year 1983, but did not have specific figures. FEIYA*s data base and agency officials' figures show the following regarding program participant age, sexI minority representation, and size of business where employed as a percentage of total unit membership.

5

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

Business . Under Agency
45
-m------e---w--(pceent)

Wmen

Hlnorltiea
-

Small --

(note
-

size
a)

Medium
-

Large
-

Comerce MID bJ15 (mote c) Interior Transportat ion FmA
ICC

7

2l2 &,,` a6

41 w46 31 b/3

23 bJ34

7

Y4 v-

w4

bJ35 y15

17 55 3

27

9
9 12 32

8

25

2

9/-

k/5

b/i0 24 .tyso 21

13
14 16

19
19 31

48
37 51

20
27 3 4

!i!P
by0 (d)

(d)
Y5 (d)

13 20 39

Awencv

Small - less
not -_

Mi;litky
Figures . .._

officials'

than 5100; medium - 500 to 5000; large - more than 5000. All other flwres are from the FEt4A data base. estimate. Sealift Command unit only.
available. -I-

Since program participation is voluntary, some agencies with important emergency responsibilities do not maintain NDER units. As examples, FEMA officials mentioned the Departments of State, Agriculture , Health and Human Services, Education, and Justice1 the Office of the Secretary of Defense; and the intelligence community. FE&IA also lacks the authority to direct agency NDER program actions. IUDERRECRUITING EFFORTS VARY AMONGAGENCIES FEWi and the individual agency units both recruit private sector executives to serve in the NDER. While FEMA has solicited members by publicizing the program in general, the other participating agencies mostly use their existing contacts with the private sector to identify prospective members. In late 1982, FEMA mounted an intensive national recruiting campaign. FEMA officials told us that the results were very good; as many as 2,000 responded and are now being screened. FEMA plans to revitalize the Inter-Agency NDER Committee to assign new reservists to the most appropriate agency. FEMA officials also hope that the conference, now scheduled for March 1983, will further increase interest in the program. when we concluded our review in February 1983, none of these applicants had yet become a member or been assigned to a specific agency. Some agency officials expressed concern as to whether individuals being recruited by FEW4 have the expertise needed in their programs.
6

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

Recruiting by the individual agencies has been far less Only Interior's Bureau of Mines has conducted any substantial. formal recruiting campa8ign, a1n.dthat has resulted in fewer than agencies with functional 20 n#ew members. All the other civil units r,~ru'it aa aa ad hoc basis, using a network of acquaintances with agency o'fficials, present NDER members, and industry executirrs.

Of the 15 HDER units, only 3 have any regular annual training. These are the Office of Industrial Resource Administration unit in Commerce, the Office of Emergency Transportation unit in Transportation, and the Fl!MA unit. Each of these holds one training maesting annually in each of its regions. Resource Administration has held --The Office of Industrial amma regional MDBR training meetings for the past 12 years. In t982 it held six 1-l/a-day meetings around the country, *in which the participants worked on problemsolving exercises under various hypothetical emergencies. All members in each region were invited to the meetings, and about 40 percent actually attended. --The Office of Rmergency Transportation held ten 2-l/2-day regional meetings during each of the past 2 years. The training for this unit also included detailed emergency scenarios for problem-solving exercises and discussions. All members in each region were invited, but attendance In addition, the Office usuaveraged below 50 percent. ally holds a national meeting for the two senior members from each region, and almost all these attend. --FEMA holds invites the orientation exercises. attend. ten .l-l/a-day regional meetings to which it reservists from'the region to participate in discussions, briefings, and problem-solving About 50 percent of the regional members

In addition, the Office of Industrial Resource Administration and the Office of Emergency Transportation units sometimes hold luncheons or meetings on their own initiative as a followup to the training meetings.

7

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

FBWA began its agency-wide training program in 1982 with two meetings. One was associated with the Rex Bravo mobilization exercise co8nductad by FEMA; the other was an initial "pilot worksibop" given by th:e W&tio8nal Emergency Training Center in I&Mm& t &w?Fg , I!lmrylmd . uplt 25 FBH4 WDBRmembers attended the Rex Bravo ex8erci.sle, while about 89 assembled a,t Bmmitsburg. In addition; ext~n~sion ce&rmes frolm the Center and the National Dasfenqe Univezsity are available to NDBR members. FEMA plans to thcaffa@ f~itid, a?f$0EtS. Of the remaining ICC, and the Military their members. 12 WDER units, only the Bureau of Mines, Sealift Command offer any training to

-The B'ureau of Mines holds two meetings annually, each lasting a few hours, scheduled to coincide with the arnw+tings of the American Mining Congres's. Nearly all the bsureau of Mines' NDER members attend the American Minimg Congress meetings, but only about one-third of these attend the WDBR training sessions. The Bureau snu~pplements these meetings with a regular mailing of information on mineral issues. --The ICC unit has offered training in its Philadelphia region, where the coordinator is very enthusiastic and has organized his own program. The other ICC regions have had no training activities. \ --The Military Sealift Command has held two orientation meetings for its members and intensive small group training exercises in conjunction with the exercise Proud Sabre, a worldwide military readiness exercise held in 1982. About two-thirds of the command's NDER members attended. MOST AGEWCIES RAVE NOT MADE SPECIFIC WDERASSIGNMENTS For the NDER program'to be effective, Federal agencies need to determine the locations where NDER members are needed and the duties they should perform. Of the 15 NDER units, only 7--the Office of Industrial Resource Administration, the Military Sealift Command, the Bureau of Mines, the Emergency Water Administration, the Office of Bmergency Transportation, the Maritime Administration, and FEWA--have identified NDER reporting locations. Only four-- the Military Sealift Command, the Emergency Water Administration, the Office of Emergency Transportation, and the Maritime Administration--have assigned both reporting locations and specific job assignments. Although the Military Sealift Command unit has given out reporting locations and duty assignment "billet descriptions," they are fairly general. .

a

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

NDER IS MINIMALLY FUNDED FEMA and the other agencies participating in NDER do not keep records giving precise cost information on NDER matters. They have, however, given FEBA estimates of funds expended for BDER in fis1cal year 1982, as follows: Program cost Bmrg y FmA Interior Commerce Transportation Labor ICC DOD Total $
450,000 184,000 163,000 125,000 70,000 60,000 40,000 35,000

$1,127,000

In all agencies, almost all the estimated costs were for staff salaries. or their companies, pay any NDER reservists, expenses incurred in attending training of meetings. There are small agency expenditures for printing and occasional staff travel. FEBA DATA B'ASE IS INACCURATE; MOST =CY WDER RECORDSARE NOT COMPUTERIZED FEMA maintains the central data base for the NDER program. FEMA's automated data system is supposed to contain complete and up-to-date information on all reservists. Rowever, the accuracy of FEMA"s records varies greatly from unit to unit. We believe this could have a highly adverse effect on the Government's ability to activate NDER. In some cases, such as PEMA's data on the Office of Industrial Resource Administration unit in Commerce, both Interior units, and the FEHA unit, accuracy appears quite good. But there are substantial differences between FEMA and agency records in other cases. For example, FEMA's data base reports 242 reservists for Transportation, while Transportation's records and FEMA's quarterly reports on NDER list 435 members. For ICC, FEMA's data base shows 437 members, while ICC records and FEMA's quarterly reports show 613 members. FEMA's data base also has many missing data elements. Three areas of vital information--reservists' locations, individual members' skills, and current membership status--are frequently incomplete. Specifically, we found the following:

ENCLOSUREI

ENCLOSUREI

Data item
Bmis phone mmber d&rumlbm BIx(phsc;~~JLmm~~s pbme mmtmr

Percent missing

of records data items
25
10

SYecurity clearance Ill;wwr;tm,,mh: I e If 1 B!Yhaqsk Social security number Designation date Redesignation date (note

27 25 488 43

a)

2 23 3 years

YFor members whose designation dates are more than BDBR designations expire after 3 years. PEMA officials told us they expect to finish updating recting the NDER data base by March 31, 1983.

old.

and cor-

Of the agencies with WDER units, only ICC, the Office of the Bmergency Water Administration, and Emergency Transportation, the Office of Industrial Resource Administration have any computThe others keep physical files, erized recordkeeping capability. usually containing only the original application forms from the The files are updated members and occ'asional corresspondence. sporadically in most agencies? ICC and the Bureau of Mines are exceptions in that they send out fairly regular mailings and request notification of change of address or other factors affectNone of the agencies except FEMA are ing a memberus status. storing NDER records in a fashion that might survive a nuclear war, and, as indicated above, FEMA's records are incomplete and inaccurate.

