ilitary aintainin Presence In An In Environment--lss And Costs
Naval Weapons Crane, Indiana of Defense
requiremilitary support civilian

Support

Center

Department

This is an unusual case study of the ments for and costs of maintaining a presence at 1 of about 90 industrial activities that have predominantly work forces.

As a result of this study, the Department of Defense has agreed to review all commercial and industrial activities to determine if military staffing can be reduced or if the total cost of the military presence can be minimized by reducing the support-of-military overhead.

i=?CD-76-7

COMPTROLIJZR

GENERAL
WASHINGTON,

OF THE
D.C 20548

UNITED

STATES

U-160813

To the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives

(j,(/Jl,

OOD~l a a

This report is the result of an unusual case study concerning the requirements for and costs of maintaining military presence at an industrial support activity with predominantly civilian work force.

The Secretary of Defense has agreed with our recomnendation to review all commercial and industrial activities to determine if reductions in military staffing can be made or if the total cost of the military presence can be minimized by reducing the support-of-military overhead. This should particularly interest the Congress in considering the Department of Defense funding request for fiscal year 1977. This review was made pursuant to the Budget ing Act, 1421 (31 U.S.C. 53), and the Accounting ing Act of 1950 (31 U.S.C. 67). We are sending copies of this report Office of Management and Budget, and the Defense and Navy. and Accountand Audit-

to the Director, Secretaries of

ACTING of the United States

Contents ----I--DIGEST CHAPTER 1
2

Page i

INTRODUCTION
e-eK"hj-~ _.-_ HNU CGsTS ij," ~viILI~A~~ ~~+$~L~$jC~JT

1 3 3 3 4 5 7 7 8 8 9 9

Center operations assignments Military personnel support assignments Costs of maintaining a military presence Analysis of annual support costs Enlisted men's mess Bachelor officers' quarters Officers' club Enlisted men's club Navy exchange Commissary Family housing Health services Athletic, hobby, and recreation services ALTERNATIVE STAFFING AND POTENTIAL SAVINGS DOD staffing policy Alternative staffingPotential savings Reduction in center manpower costs Reduction in costs of support services Additional savings resulting from reducing Navy manpower levels
4

10 11 11
13 13 13 15 15 15

16
17 17 18 18

IMPROVEMENTS NEEDED IN NAVY MILITARY MAcJPOWER MANAGEMENT Navy's system for determining military manpower requirements How the requirements system is working at NWSC Crane Navy's system for assigning enlisted personnel How the enlisted personnel assignment system is working at NWSC Crane

18

-Page CHAPTER 5
6

USE OF PUBLIC FUNDS FOR WELFARE AND RECREA*PION CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS Ccnclusions Recommendations Matters for consideration by the Congress Agency actions

21 25 25 26 26 27

APPENDIX I

Photograph Photograph quarters Photograph store

of enlisted of bachelor --lounge of

men's officers'

mess

28
29

retail/wholesale

liquor 30

Photograph of officers' bar and lounge Photograph Photograph Photograph Photograph II III IV March the of enlisted

club--upstairs 31 men's club 32 33 34 35 36 38

of Navy exchange of commissary of bowling alley

25, 1975, Secretary

letter from GAO to of the Navy

October 30, Secretary

1975, letter from the of the Navy to GAO

November 26, 1975, letter from the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) to GAO Alternative staffing plan for Crane

42 45

v
VI

Principal officials responsible for administering activities discussed in this report

47

ABBREVIATIONS ADP
BOQ

automatic bachelor Chief

data officers

processing ' quarters Operations

CNO DOD GAO NWSC Crane O&MN

of Naval

Department General Naval

of Defense Accounting Office Center, Crane, Navy Indiana

Weapons Support

Operations

and Maintenance,

COMPTROLLER GENERAL'S REPORTTO THE CONGRESS

MAINTAINING A MILITARY PRESENCE IN AN INDUSTRIAL ENVIRONMENT--ISSUES AND COSTS Naval Weapons Support Center Crane, Indiana Department of Defense

DIGEST -----/

The Department of Defense operates about 90 commercial and industrial military support activities, excluding shipyards. Although the work forces are predominant I y civilian, over 10,000 military personnel are assigned to them. / To determine the need for and the cost of a military presence, GAO made a case study at the Naval Weapons Support Center, Crane, Indiana. t the end of 1974, the center had P a work force of about 4,500 civilians and a military complement of 68--19 officers and 49 enlisted men. ROLE AND COST OF MILITARY PERSONNEL AT THE CENTER

knly 23 (about one-third) of the 68 military personnel were doing center-related work or were working for other military'activities. The remaining 45, plus 10 civilians, were providing support services for the military complement, such as food and housekeeping, recreation, commissary and exchange stores, and health care./ (See p. 3.) Maintaining a military presence at the center costs about $1.2 million annually: --$405,400 for paying 23 military personnel involved in center-related work, liaison, and security. --$533,000 for paying 45 military personnel and 10 civilians supporting the military complement. --$236,300 military facilities.
Tear Sheet. Upon removal, cover date should be noted

for operating and maintaining personnel support activities (See p. 4.) i

and FPCD-76-7

the report hereon.

Examples I .

of

military

support

costs

follow.

mess --3 enlisted men and .`ti2civilians were feeding an average of less .%han 10 persons daily at a net operating cost or about $5,200 per person $51,800, of about a year. (See p. 7.) seven enlisted 0 an average of less than five transients daily at a net operating cost of $70,100 a year. The quarters were used at only about 17-percent capacity for a 15-month period. (See p. 7.) the club produces revenue. Officers' club-the salaries of the civilian manager However, and his assistant and the maintenance costs are paid by appropriated funds--about $42,400 The club, which includes a dining annually. and party and game rooms, is room, two bars, used extensively by civilians. The club also provides facilities for a retail liquor sales outlet for military personnel. (See p. 8.) Enlisted -- men's revenue and is club-this subsidized dining club also produces by appropriated including the ;;ey

funds
and

($22,400
allowances

annually of one enlisted
and

man).
area, and

club
Navy

has a bar,
room.

dance

a game

(See pp.

8 and 9.)

exchanqe-four enlisted men tiork at the which includes a retail general exchange, -gasoline station, and barber shop. store, Military pay and allowances, plus other costs subsidized by appropriated funds, total about A large percentage of the $48,500 annually. exchange customers are retired military families. (See p. 9.) Commissary--the pay and allowances of the four enlisted men who work at the commissary, plus other costs subsidized by appropriated funds, total about $92,400 annually. The comnissary is also used extensively by retired military personnel. (See pp. 5 and 10.) Family housiz 4 L t e costs of 33 family units for military average about $48,000 a year. ii maintaining personnel The monthly

net cost to individual listed man (See cer.

the Government for maintaining units ranged from $19 for an ento $597 for the commanding offip. 10.)

Athletic, hobby, -and recreation services-eight enlisted men were providing recreation and other special services involving a gym25 fishing boats and nasium, bowling alleys, and a ceramic shop at an anpleasure craft, nual cost of $181,200. (See pp. 11 and 12.) ALTERNATIVE STAFFING 2GAO developed an alternative which would result in --a --an decrease increase of 65 military of 25 civilian staffing positions, positions, and 2 en(see pattern

--temporarily retaining 1 officer listed men (see p. 15), and --annual savings p. 13). c of about $858,000

MANPOWERREQUIREMENTS AND ASSIGNMENTS could not explain how the requirethe center's military'personnel were established. Also,. the number of military personnel assigned to the center generally exceeded authorized levels. Several enlisted men in excess of authorized levels held ratings needed elsewhere in the Navy, and others were assigned duties unrelated to their skills. (See pp. 17 to 20.) USE OF PUBLIC FUNDSFOR WELFARE AND RECREATION The broad wording of the appropriation acts, coupled with the language of Defense and Navy Department directives, gives base commanding officers great latitude in determining the proper use of appropriated funds to support morale, welfare, and recreation activities. This issue has been the subject of several GAO reports. (See pp. 21 to 24.)

Navy L The ments for

Tear Sheet

iii

KCONCLUSIONS
policy for staffing has not been fully impleGAO questions the need mented at the center. for and assignment of military personnel to extensive welfare and recreation costs Crane: have been generated which would not otherwise have occurred. Because the center's functions are primarily industrial, managing them does The required not require military personnel. skilled people can be found in either the public or private sector.
support activities

Department

of Defense

k'RECOMMENDATIONS
GAO recommends that the Secretary of Defense: --Direct the Navy to convert the work force at the center as discussed in GAO's alternative staffing plan. To the extent possible, changes from Navy military personnel to civilians should be accomplished by norAs these mal rotation and reassignment. changes occur, Navy appropriations should be adjusted to reduce manpower costs. --Review all other commercial and industrial military support activities to identify how military personnel could be reduced and how the activities could be made more efficient and economical by employing more civilians. 34MATTERSFOR CONSIDERATION BY THE CONGRESS
The

Secretary

Congress

of Defense to:

should

consider

requiring

the

\

assure the Congress that the work' T --Annually forces being used at industrial facilities are the most economical and efficient mix of military, civilian, and contractor labor. --Annually identify and justify the dollar amount and contemplated object of the funds being requested to support morale, recreaand tion, and welfare for both military civilian personnel.

iv

The Congress should consider the desirability of estaolishing definitive guidelines on the use of funds considered available for welfare and recreation. AGEL'KY ACTIONS -m The Department of Defense is complying with GAO's recommendation to review all commercial ai-~d inoiistr iCii - act--.it-ec IF 7-G... c A* A_ u to deCerm2ne ductions in military staffing can be made. The review, however, will not be limited "to the two options that GAO addresses; status quo or complete civilianization." The Department of Defense: will review alternatives that include military manpower where it is either required, or is less expensive on a billet by billet basis than civilian manpower. But we will seek to minimize the total cost of military presence k-`~ reducing the supportof-military overhead."
`I* * *

Tear Sheet 1

_.--____-_.-

---

-

-

-

-----

-.-

.--.-.-_

-.

__.-*.-

----

-

-

`-

CHAPTER -_----

1 /

INTROCUCTION ----

"It is the sense of Congress that the Department of Defense shall use the least costly form of with military requiremanpower * * * consistent ments and other needs of the Department * * *. in iieveliipins the annual manpower .a:lthc>rization requests to the Congress and in carrying the Secretary of Defense out manpower policies, shall, in particular, consider the advantages of converting from one form of manpower to another (military, civilian, or private contract) for the performance of a specified job. * * *' L/
!I* * *

'

The Department of Defense (DOD) operates about 90 commercial and industrial military support activities, excluding Although the work forces are predominantly shipyards. more than 10,000 military personnel are assigned civilian, to these activities. Navy military personnel constitute more than 50 percent of thatcfotal., : _ r . I* The Naval Weapons Support Center, Crane, Indiana (NWSC Crane), is an industrial military support activity. At the end of 1974, NWSC Crane had a civilian work force of about 4,500 and a military complement of 68--19 officers and 49O enlisted men. and stores various types NWSC'Crane receives, renovates, including pyrotechnics, mines, depth charges, of ammunition, Also, the center explosives, and related components. provides logistics support for produces bombs and explosives, sophisticated weapon systems, plans reauirements for industrial equipment, and takes part in other engineering and scientific programs. Using NWSC Crane as a case study, we examined (1) the role of a military complement in an industrial environment, (2) the costs generated by that military presence, (3) the advantages of converting from one form of manpower to another, and (4) the Navy's system for determining military manpower needs and assigning military personnel. l/Department of Defense Appropriation Public Law 93-365, title V, sec. 5, 1974). (Aug. Authorization 502, 88 Stat., Act, 399.404

Comments have been received from the Secretary of Defense and the Department of the Navy and, where appropriate, have been included in this report.

CHAPTER 2 ROLE AND COSTS OF MILITARY CENTER OPERATIONS ASSIGNMENTS Only 18 of the 68 military personnel assigned at NWSC Crane were directly involved in center-related work--command, supervisory, and technical. Another five were doing liaison and security work for other military activities. Their specific assignments follow. Officers Center operations: Administration: Command Command projects Supervision: Facilities construction, operations, and repair and maintenance Ammunition production, assembly, processing, storage, and loading Supply activities Quality control and research and development Technical: Ordnance disposal Construction contracting Automatic data processing (ADP) equipment maintenance and repair Total Other military activities: Marine Corps Liaison Office Naval Security Group Detachment Total Total MILITARY were PERSONNEL SUPPORT ASSIGNMENTS Enlisted personnel Total COMPLEMENT

2 1

2 1

4

4

3 1 2 1 1
-

2

-1 18 1 2 2 5 6 = 23 C

15 1 -1 2 17 =

The remaining 45 military personnel, plus 10 civilians, assigned to provide military personnel support services, I

such as food and housekeeping, recreation, Their exchange stores, and health care. follow. Function Administration: Military personnel management Military pay clerk Health services Morale, welfare, and recreation: Commissary Exchange store Enlisted men's club Officers' club Sports and hobbies Housing and subsistence:
Bachelor officers'

commissary and specific assignments

Officers

Enlisted personnel

Civilians

Total

1 15 4 4 1 8

1 1

3 161 8 4 1 2 8

4

2

quarters
Enlisted

(BOQ)
men's mess

7 3 -43

-2

7 -5

10 55 About one-third of the military complement was involved in industrial operations, liaison, and other military activities. The remaining two-thirds were assigned to provide military personnel support services.

Total

COSTS OF MAINTAINING A MILITARY PRESENCE tary It cost about $1.2 million personnel at NWSCCrane: --$405,400 for nel involved activities. annually to maintain 68 mili-

pay and allowances of 23 military personin center operations and other military

--$533,000 for pay and allowances of 45 military and 10 civilian personnel involved in military personnel support. --$236,300 for operating and maintaining military personnel support activities and facilities.

4

As two-thirds 0
10

illustrated of the
20

below, support total costs.
30 40 50

costs

represented

almost

PERCENTAGE OF COSTS
60 70 80 90 100

PAY AND ALLOWANCES

OF 23 MILITARY

PERSONNEL ASSIGNED TO CENTER

OPERATIONS AND OTHER MILITARY

ACTIVITIES AND CIVILIAN PERSONNEL AND AND

PAY AND ALLOWANCES OF 55 MILITARY OPERATION FACILITIES AND MAINTENANCE

COSTS FORtlLlTARY

SUPPORT ACTIVITIES

In . commenting on our report, the Navy disagreed that * .-. maintaining a military presence at the center cost about $1.2 million annually. The Navy computed total costs of $320,327, using "The current military salary and civilian salaries at fiscal year level (including 11.2% for fringe O&MN [Operations and Naintenance, experienced in fiscal year 1975." allowance scale, 1575 salary benefits), and Navy] cost as

We examined the data supporting the Navy's computation to reconcile the difference. They understated total personnel costs by $113,900. Annual 96NN costs of about $236,000 were not included in their total costs. -ANALYSIS --------_-OF AANUAL SUPPORT COSTS ___------support a year. guarters

NWSC Crane provided its 68 military personnel services and facilities costing more than $750,000 These included family housing; bachelor officers'

5

and enlisted barracks; dispensary: chapel; food service: commissary and Navy exchange stores; social clubs and swimming pools for officers and enlisted men; a golf course; a gymnasium; and many other morale, welfare, and recreation The average annual support costs services and facilities. follow. Enlisted men's mess Health services Bachelor officers' quarters Officers' club Enlisted men's club Navy exchange Commissary Administration Family housing Athletic, hobby, and recreation services Total $ 51,800 172,000 70,100
42,400 22,400 48,500 92,400 40,400 48,100

-a/181,200 mm$769,300 ---

a/Includes costs of operating the chapel and chapel annex, officer's and enlisted men's tennis courts, swimming pools, men's boat docks and golf course, ball park, enlisted 25 pleasure and fishing boats and motors, rifle and archery tables, ranges, ceramic shop, gymnasium, sauna, billiard bowling alleys, and gym equipment. L'Jote: Average annual costs were based on three factors:

--Yearly pay and allowances for 45 military personnel and 10 civilians, using Oct. 1, 1974, pay rates. --Yearly total operation and maintenance expenses, using a monthly average of total charges to appropriated funds for the 39 months ended Sept. 30, 1974. --Average annual operating losses for the 39 months ended Sept. 30, 1974, at the bachelor officers' quarters and enlisted men's mess. The Navy has disagreed that supporting the military complement at the center costs more than $769,000 annually and "determined a more realistic recurring annual cost to be on the order of $566,705," or a difference of about $203,000. The Navy's computation contained various erroneous calculations and omissions: (1) personnel costs were understated by $94,400 and (2) utilities, ground maintenance, and other operations and maintenance expenses totaling $52,400 were excluded. In addition, the Navy invalidly assumed that
6

our computation of family housing costs included nonrecurring costs of about $33,500. The nonrecurring costs the Navy identified were not included in our estimated annual housing Other minor adjustments totaling about $10,400 recosts. sulted because of minor variances between the pay and allowances of the military personnel assigned in November 1974 when our computations were made and the pay and allowances of the military personnel assigned in September 1975 when the Navy made their computation. Enlisted ---men's mess

Five employees (3 military and 2 civilian personnel) were operating the enlisted men's mess (see p. 28) and feeding an The annual cost of average of less than 10 persons daily. providing the rations for each person exceeded $5,200. Operating expenses averaged cluded (1) pay and allowances of employees and (2) costs of food, and maintenance. Income from the $3,800 annually, resulting in an of $51,800. Bachelor officers' quarters $55,600 annually and inthe military and civilian operating supplies, laundry, sale of food averaged annual net operating cost

Seven enlisted men were working at the bachelor officers' quarters. (See p. 29.) Lodging and food were provided for an average of less than five transients daily. Annual operating expenses averaged $72,300 for pay and allowances of the enlisted personnel, food costs, laundry, operating supplies, and maintenance. Rental income, cash received from food and linen charges averaged $2,200 annually, resulting sales, in an annual net operating cost of $70,100. The BOQ included 3 furnished apartments and 14 single and double rooms, a guest lounge and billiard room, a kitchen and dining room, an office, and 2 rooms and a lounge for enlisted stewards. Occupancy records were available for only They showed the fathe 15 months ended September 30, 1974. cility was operating at only 17-percent capacity during that period. Only one bachelor officer was assigned at NWSC Crane He was residing at Bloomington, at the time of our review. about 35 miles from the center. Indiana, Food services economy measure. were reassigned. were discontinued However, none of in October the enlisted 1974 as an personnel

7

contain

The Department the following

of the Navy's statement:

comments

on our

draft

report

"Bachelor Officer Quarters. Of the seven enlisted men assigned to the BOQ In September 1974 only one mess management specialist, pay grade E-3 (annual salary $8,239) is now assigned. Because of the low BOQ occupancy rate the facility will be placed in a standby status and used only at those times when there is a demand for transient accommodations that justifies use of the facility. At other times transient personnel will be able to use four BOQ one-room units on the second floor of the building housing the officers club. Placing the large BOQ in a standby status will result in a savings of heating and other utility costs."

Officers'

club

No military personnel were assigned to the officers' club. It was managed and operated by two civilians (GS-10 and GS-7) paid from appropriated funds. They were assisted by four full-time and three part-time civilian employees paid from club revenues. Facilities included a dining room for weekday lunches and catering, two bars, and a number of party and game rooms. (The club also provided facilities for a retail liquor sales outlet for military personnel and a wholesale outlet for the officers' and enlisted men's clubs. (See p. 30.) The club produced revenue and was heavily subsidized with appropriated funds. There were no membership fees. Financial statements for fiscal year 1974 showed an operating profit of $7,000. However, the statements did not include salary costs for the civilian manager and assistant or operation and maintenance expenses charged to appropriated funds. These costs averaged $42,400 annually. Data was not available to show the extent of military and civilian patronage. However, we believe it was predominantly civilian. The manager told us lunches were served to a daily average of 60 persons--3 officers and 57 civilians. He also told us the bar facilities were used regularly in the evenings by about 2 officers and 13 civilians. (See p. 31.) Enlisted men's club

A chief petty officer managed the club. (See p. 32.) He was assisted by one part-time and seven full-time civilian employees paid from club revenues.
8

Facilities
a game room.

included
The club docks

also

listed in the

men's boat northwest section

dining and dancing areas, and operated a snackbar at the enat Lake Greenwood, an 800-acre lake of NWSC Crane.

a bar,

The club produced revenue and was subsidized with appropriated funds. For the 12 months ended January 1974, the club reported bar and food income of $34,300 and a net profit of $3,900. However, the pay and allowances of the chief petty officer who managed the facility and utilities and maintenance costs charged to appropriated funds were not included. These costs averaged $22,400 annually in the periods reviewed. told 120 Navy The club did not charge that about 40 enlisted civilian employees used exchange a membership fee. We were men, 90 retired personnel, and the facility regularly.

Four enlisted men were assigned to the exchange. (See p. 33.) One managed the exchange: the others were part of the clerical staff. In addition, one part-time and three full-time civilian employees were paid from exchange revenues. Financial statements for the 2 years ended January 1974 showed net earnings of $47,200 from gross sales of $584,000. However, the pay and allowances of the military personnel working at the exchange and the operation and maintenance costs charged to appropriated funds were not included. These costs averaged $48,500 annually in the periods reviewed. The station, products, equipment, toiletries, tomers exchange operated a retail general store, gasoline and barber shop. The store offered a variety of including food, smoking accessories, photographic hardware, household and garden supplies, toys, clothing, and shoes. that about military 80 percent personnel of and the exchange their families. cus-

We were told were retired

Commissary -Four enlisted men worked at the commissary (see p. 34)-one was the manager and the others stocked shelves, cut meat, operated cash registers, received merchandise, and supervised the store and warehouse. The store provided a complete line of grocery products--meats, frozen foods, dry goods, produce, dairy products, baked goods, and canned goods. It was open 5 days a week.

9

Financial records showed a net profit of $5,800 on net However, the pay and sales of $538,000 in fiscal year 1974. allowances of the military work force, the salaries for four civilian employees, and the operating and maintenance expenses These costs, averaging $92,400 annually in were not included. the periods reviewed, were charged to appropriated funds. lies Family About 80 percent of the commissary's militarqr personnel. of retired housing at NWSC Crane. In and 14 by enlisted patrons were fami-

There were 33 family housing units 18 were occupied by officers April 1975, personnel. One was vacant.

Twenty-two units were located in a residential area on a wooded hill above Lake Greenwood. Eighteen officers and One of three chief petty officers occupied these quarters. the quarters was vacant. The commanding officer's quarters

had 6 bedrooms and 4-l/2

baths.

A guesthouse,

boathouse,

storage building, and two greenhouses were also provided for his use. Nine units had 4 bedrooms and 3-l/2 baths, and 12 units had 3 bedrooms and l-1/2 baths. Of the remaining 11 units, 6 were 'classified as farm(5 were declared inadequate in 1973), 2 were in a homes with 2 bedrooms and 1 bath. duplex, and 3 were single All were occupied by enlisted personnel. houses We computed the operation and maintenance costs for selected two-, three-, and four-bedroom units and the unit For the 39-month period assigned to the commanding officer. reviewed, monthly net costs to the Government for these units ranged from $19 to $597, as shown below. Total costs for 39 months Q/$33,900 15,700 11,800 7,400 deducted operating Average monthly costs $870 403 302 189 from military Monthly rental income (note a) $273 252 185 170 pay. greenhouses, and Monthly net costs to Government $597 151 117 19

Quarters A B J z a/Quarters

No. of bedrooms 6 4 3 2 allowances for

&/Included costs boathouse.

guesthouse,

10

charges to appropriated funds In the 39-month period, for operation and maintenance costsl including repairs and other than routine maintenance, for the 33 units totaled $380,000. About 60 percent of this was offset by rental income and housing allowances forfeited by military personnel, resulting in net costs to the Government of about or an average annual cost of $48,100. $156,300, Health services

Health services were provided by a military doctor, 15 military corpsmen, a civilian doctor, 3 civilian nurses, The miliand 8 civilian technicians and clerical personnel. tary doctor and corpsmen provided outpatient services for the center's 68 military personnel, other active duty military of about 700 retired personnel in the areap and the families military personnel. They also performed routine medical tests, including X-ray, laboratory tests, and electrocardiograms, for both military personnel and civilian employees. The civilian medical staff provided outpatient services and performed preemployment, periodic, and special physical examinations for the center's 4,500 civilian employees. They U&Y" -lcn administered the center's occupational health proqram. In the 14 months ended August 31, 1974, the military staff examined, diagnosed, and treated 6,300 military outpatients. Of this total, 39 percent were active duty personnel and their dependents, and 61 percent were retired military personnel and their dependents. For the period reviewed, the average annual operating costs charged to appropriated funds were $172,000. These included pay and allowances of $147,000 for 16 military personnel and operation and maintenance costs of $25,000 for the health facilities and bachelor enlisted quarters in the same building. Athletic, -hobby, and recreation services and services.

Eight enlisted men were assigned to administer provide free-time athletic, hobby, and recreation (See p. 35.) --A

senior chief boatswain's mate, assisted by a storekeeper second class, supervised and administered overall athletic and recreation services and facilities. machinist's a ceramics personrel 11 mate and an apprentice seashop used primarily by reand dependents.

--A first-class man operated tired military

--A --A

machinist's operated the

mate and a third-class gymnasium.

gunner's

mate

first-class gunner's mate was assigned to maintain 25 fishing boats and pleasure craft and also worked A second-class boatswain's at the bowling alley. mate maintained the boat motors. The boats were used extensively by retired military personnel. hobby, and

Annual total costs of providing athletic, recreation services averaged $131 I 200 o

12

CHAPTER 3 ALTERNATIVE----- STAFFIlJG DOD's AND POTENTIAL -

SAVINGS

policy for staffing industrial support activities Seventeen has not been fully implemented at NWSC Crane. civilians and 3 military personnel could do the essential tasks (managerial, supervisory, and technical) assigned to By adjusting the 23 military personnel at the end of 1974. c.c-.FF: mc1 2nd &dilq 18 civilians t.2 the mar?:.-=? ;-)LULIA_IAy ...-^--v..h <er,srtmcnt r -- -me----I the rJavy could eliminate 45 military and 10 civilian support positions and save about $858,300 annually. DOD STAFFING POLICY -DOD Directive support activities tary or civilian 1100.9 states that management positions in such as NWSC Crane be designated as miliaccording to the following criteria:

--Military personnel normally will be assigned if required by law, if the position requires skills and knowledge acquired primarily through military training and experience, and when experience in the positinn is essential to enable officers to asslume responsibilities necessary to maintain combat-related support and proper career development. --Civilian personnel norinally will be assigned when the skills required are usually found in the civilian economy and continuity of management and experience is essential and can be better provided by civilians. Documentation was not criteria or any other Crane. ALTERNATIVE STAFFING staffing We applied pattern DOD's criteria shown below. and developed the alternative available to substantiate that these were used by the Navy in staffing NWSC

13

Current Center

staffing Civilians Total

operations assignment

Militarv personnel

Alternative staffing ZZtary personnel Civilians 2 1"

__ Total -a2 3

Administration: Command Command projects supervision: Facilities COnStrUCtiOn, operations, repairs, and maintenance Ammunition production, assembly, processing, storage, and loading Supply activities Quality control and research and development Technical: Ordnance disposal Construction contracting ADP equipment maintenance and repair Other military activities: Marine Corps Liaison Office Naval Security Group Detachment Total Military personnel assignment personnel support

1"
4

4 3 1 2 a/3 1 1

4 2 1. 2 I

4 2 1 2 3 1

2 -3 23 --

2 -3 2

2

2 - 3 20 --

(b)

23 --

-17

Administration: Military agement Health

man2 16

Military

services

pay clerk and recrea-

:

: 16 8 4 1 2 a

ivlorale, welfare,

918

18

tion : Commissary Exchange Enlisted men's club Officers' club sports and hobbies Housing and subsistence: Bachelor officers' quarters Enlisted men's mess Total
Tu'cai military a/For a temporary period, demolition jobs. Few civilians be trained and eventually could

7 -- 3 -45 66 = technicians are qualified replace the or second-level

-- 2 -10 --it will for
military

7 -5 -55

--

-18
-18 38 z

iir 3 35 = = = be needed for high-risk, this work; however, they personnel. positions positions those in all

ordnance could

b/Civilians operating

occupy either departments.

first-

supervisory

c/The addition of 18 civilians would eliminate 16 military medical department to continue present services, including retired personnel and their dependents.

and enable provided for

the

14

To sum up, following: --A --An decrease increase

alternative of of

staffing

would positions. positions.

result

in the

65 military 25 civilian

--Temporarily

retaining

1 officer

and 2 enlisted

men.

Fke Depart,ii&it Of ~;leftlei~~ zisaGree< ;;ith ,giLr cOr~&'~siO~z that the policy for staffing support activities has not been DOD believes that a certain number of implemented at Crane. officers must be kept in activities such as NWSC Crane because experience in field activities enhances their ability to manage these activities from the headquarters level. DOD also feels that a cadre of officers with experience in field activities is required for rapid expansion or reopening of activities for mobilization. Since AWSC Crane is an industrial activity, managing the Center does not require skills and knowledge acquired primarily through military training and experience; management skills can be provided by civilians. POTENTIAL SAVINGS Reduction --in center manpower costs

With the assistance of the principal position classifier the job classifications, grades, at NWSC Crane, we identified and salaries of civilian equivalents for military positions Our alternative staffing would which could be converted. reduce manpower costs by about $465,000 annually at NWSC Crane. (See app. V.) Reduction -in costsof support services

Converting from military to civilian manpower would eliminate the need for most of the military support Gacilities. Cost reductions for utility services, consumable supand repairs and maintenance of equipment and buildings plies, would amount to about $198,000 annually, as shown below.

15

Operations aperation L+laintenance, Commissary Officers I- club Enlisted men's club Athletic, hobby, and recreation services En1 isted men ' s &mess Navy exchange Family quarters Estimated Our savings did
$ 6,825 12,300 9,025 64,15U 3,950 4,575 25,025 $126,450

and and----iqavy

maintenance -w-m-Navy Industrial Fund
$ 2,750 4,450 430

costs Total --$
3,575 17,350 9,425 . h - r r- n IVL,O3V 4,525 6,125 48,100 $197,750

36,5SS 575 1,550 23,075 --571,300 --

computation

not

provide

for

any

fixed

costs

which might be incurred

for continued

standby

maintenance

and repairs. However, we believe these may be partially or fully offset by alternate uses the Navy may make of the For example, the family quarters, vacated facilities. and recreation facilities could bachelor officers' quarters, continue to operate under contract or other self-supporting, rrvende-pi oG:Lici,,g &iiTaiiJEXlEntS. Additional reducing
NdSC Crane,

savings-resulting Navy manpower

from levels

To maintain the present level of military strength at the Navy included within its total manpower authorization an additional support increment, or "tail" (trainees, transients, patients, and prisoners), of about 20 percent of the center's authorized military strength. This amounts to an additional 11 Navy personnel who would not be needed if the work force were converted as proposed in the alternative staffing plan.
Climinatin; ,a-&...&..--

$;195,30(1 assigned

annually, to the

support increment will save the average cost of 11 military 57 billets authorized iqWSC Crane.

the

about personnel

16

CHAPTER 4 ---IMPROVEMENTS NEEDED IN NAVY MILITARY ----e--e-MANPOWER - MANAGEMENT The Navy's systems for determining military manpower requirements and assigning personnel were not working at NWSC Crane. --Workload standards manpower studies had not been made or staffing developed to substantiate the center's needs. men were assigned than

--44 percent more enlisted were authorized. NAVY'S SYSTEM FOR DETERMINING MILITARY MANPOWERREQUIREMENTS

The Chief of Naval Operations (CNO) is responsible for planning, forecasting, and determining manpower requirements f,or the fleet and supporting services. Requirements are determined by applying staffing standards to ..sw afl+-11=11 w-u+ or projected workloads. The staffing standards for shore installations were declared obsolete in February 1974 but will continue to be used as a guide. New standards are to be completed by 1979. power Various command levels requirements. are involved in determining man-

--Navy Manpower and Material Analysis Centers at Norfolk and San Diego are responsible for implementing CNO manpower policies and programs, planning and coordinating manpower studies, supervising the development of staffing standards, and preparing manpower documents. --Commanding sponsible authorizations (including authorized necessary functions officers of ships and stations are refor periodically reviewing manpower to insure the number of billets skills, pay grade, and qualifications) are the minimum military requirements to support the missions, tasks, and of their commands. for for

--Military manpower claimants are responsible reviewing requests from commanding officers changes in manpower authorizations and

17

recommending CNO approval or disapproval, estimating future manpower needs, and assisting in validating manpower requirements during annual budget reviews. HOW THE REQUIREMENTS SYSTEM --IS WORKING AT NWSC CRANE ------At the end of November 1974, NWSC Crane was authorized 38 military personnei biiiets--13 officers and 25 enlisted An additional 19 billets were authorized for tenant men. organizations, such as the Marine Corps Liaison Office, commissary, and Navy exchange. The enlisted personnel authorization included only two code "G" billets, or general billets, established at shore installations to improve sea-to-shore rotation. No data was available requirements were established, not been made at the center. nor the military personnel numbers and types of billets officials at the Naval Sea miiitary manptiwer ciaiir:ant plain how the requirements NAVY'S SYSTEM FOR ASSIGNING -ENLISTED PERSONNEL The Navy has a centralized enlisted system under the direction of the Chief Manning and detailing control authorities personnel assignment of Naval Personnel, under the Chief to show how military manpower A requirements study had Neither the commanding officer officer could explain how the were determined. Further, Systems Command, NWSC Crane's since Jidy 1974, could not exwere determined.

of Naval Personnel

are responsible

for

(1) identifying

enorder and order-

listed personnel requirements and recommending the in which they should be filled and (2) identifying ing particular individuals to fill the billets.

Porsonnol assignment pelicies issued by the Chief of Java1 Personnel provide for the equitable distribution of enlisted personnel by skills and total numbers to all activities in proportion to authorized allowances. The policy statement specifies that an activity not be manned in excess of authorized billets unless there are Navy-wide excesses in the applicable ratings. HOW THE ENLISTED PERSONNEL ASSIGNMENT g?%?IS WORKING AT NWSC CRANE
PM-

Since 1970, the number of enlisted personnel (excluding those personnel assigned to tenant organizations) at NWSC Crane has generally exceeded authorized levels by 26 to 73 percent. 18

As -- of June June June June June ?dovD 1370 1971 1972 1~73 1974 1 fI 74 '3

Authorized ------30 30 27 23 27 7c LJ

Assigned --52 51 34 25 41 36

Percent over or under (-) authorization 73 70 26 -11 52 44

At the time of our review, several of the excess personnel held ratings in short supply in the Xavy. Further, personnel were assigned to duties unrelated to their skills. For example: --A --A first tionist first class billet machinist's mate in a movie projecwas operating a ceramic shop. in a property fishing boats, clerk motors, work.

billet

class gunner's mate was helping maintain and pleasure craft. third class gunner's

--A

mate was doing

clerical

--A chief boatswain's mate in a small billet was supervising the athletic program.

craft maintenance and recreation

The commanding officer at NWSC Crane had no control over the numbers and qualifications of enlisted personnel assigned to his station through the Navy's assignment system. He was, however, authorized to reassign them within the station once they were assigned. Although the commanding officer was authorized to reassign military personnel within the station to meet base manning needs, l/ DOD and Navy directives prohibit the assignment of military personnel to morale, welfare, and recreational functions except (1) at locations where qualified civilians are not available, (2) for purposes of rotation, training, and career progression not available at other activities, or (3) where command supervision is essential and cannot otherwise be effectively provided. 2/ The Navy Department's were:
-------_

comments

concerning

this

problem

Q'OPNAV (Chief para. Sa(l),

of Naval Operations) Feb. 5, 1973.

Instruction

lOOO.l6c, of Naval Oct. 1954.

2/DOD Directive 1315.10, Apr. 6, 1372, and sureau Personnel iNlanua1, Section 186u250, paras. 2,3,4, 19

"Generally speaking, this activity has been overmanned due to a temporary Navy-wide excess manning in certain enlisted ratings. In addition, shortages of PCS funds during the last two years have precluded movement of these personnel; therefore they have allowed to attrite at previously scheduled/budgeted times. Every effort is being made by Chief of Naval Personnel to eguitably man all naval activities consistent with existing monetary constraints and available personnel assets." Navy's reply to our report also stated that an effort to determine military and civilian manpower requirements at Crane, as well as all other shore activities, is presently

scheduled

for completion

in fiscal

year 1980.

20

CdAPTER -

2

USE OF PUBLIC FUi\IDS FOR WELFARE AND RECREATION m----e I-m--L_--As a result of our analysis of the support costs for the we addressed a series of quesmilitary personnel at Crane, (See tions to the Secretary of the iJavy on ivlarch 25, 1975. Eight months later, we received a reply from the app. II.) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management) D (See app. III.; the Department of Defense appropriation acts In essence, for fiscal years 1974 and 1975 make funds available for recreational activities, facilities, and projects falling under the general heading, "welfare and recreation." l/ Although DGD and the Navy Department have issued directives which attempt to regulate the use of generally appropriated funds for welfare and recreation, the broad wording of the appropriation acts, coupled with the language of DOD and Navy Department directives, gives base commanding officers great latitude in determining the nature and extent of permissible recreational facility funding. reference to the NWSC Crane facility, With pa rticular the base commanding officer authorized spending approximately $70,400 over a period of 24 months for the construction and improvement of two buildings and a connecting structure, all of which now comprise NWSC Crane's golf clubhouse. Five contracts were awarded to arrive at the total installation: three were charged to the Navy Industrial Fund; the remaining two were charged to the Navy's Operation and Maintenance Appropriation. At the time the clubhouse was constructed, governing Navy regulations required approval from "higher authority" for recreational construction projects exceeding a cost of $25,000. 2/ Also, section 2674 of title 10, United States Code (1970 ), authorized the construction of public works projects exceeding a cost of $50,000, but not in excess of $100,000, if the project received the advance approval of the Secretary of the service concerned. Advance approval for the entire clubhouse project apparently was not obtained.
----

of Defense Appropriation L/Act of Oct. 26, 1972 (Department Law No. 92-570, title III, 86 Stat. 1184, Act 1 r Public 1186; Act of Jan. 2, 1974 (Department of Defense AppropriaPublic Law No. 93-238, tion Act), title VII, sec. 744, 102'6, 1046; Act of Oct. 8, 1974 (Department of 87 Stat. Defense Appropriation Act), Public Law No. 93-437, title 842, 88 Stat. 1212, 1232. VIII, sec. /Special (Mar. Services 1969). Manual, NAr'PERS 15863B, ch. V, sec. 502

21

advised the secretary of the Our idarch 25, 1975, letter ;Javy of our concerns regarding the construction of this The iilavy replied that the second building was clubhouse. constructed independently from tne first and that the construction of the connecting structure was completed as an "to improve the habitability" of the two buildafterthought While explaining that it never intended to circumvent ings. regulations to arrive at the total present installation, the rdavy also stated: I,* * * In situations of this nature, to avoid any semblance of statutory violations, it should be incumbent on all higher echelon commands to require submission of and to review in advance similar projects to determine propriety thereof." Appropriated funds were used to pay officer and enlisted club managers. Operating expenses and food costs at a mess where meals were sold to officers and civilians (officers' mess open) were paid for by generally appropriated funds 'The expenses of maintaining the without full reimbursement. golf course fairway were charged to the Havy`s Operation and Maintenance Appropriation. A pool operated by NWSC Crane's Civilian Employees Association was resurfaced and repaired with ;\Javy Industrial Fund and O&IMN funds. The tiavy observed that its regulations permit paying club with appropriated funds and the like managers, treasurers, because commanding officers, through such personnel, provide command executive supervision at nonappropriated fund activities. (Navy Comptroller tianual, paras. 035851 and 075260.) 'The Navy further indicated that in the future most of the mess open will be reimbursed to the costs of the officers' charged appropriation, as contemplated by the appropriation acts and DOij directives. 1/ However, the Wavy intends to continue maintaining garbage-and trash removal on a nonreimbursable basis. The Mavy also stated that maintaining fairways critri d~prtig;iatid funds has ken ; longstanding practice, since the resulting costs are more closely related to normal grounds maintenance than to a special welfare and recreation cost. of Defense Appropriation l/Act of Jan. 2, 1974 (Department Act 1, Public Law No. 93-233, title VII, sec. 710, 37 Stat. 1026, 104G; Act of Oct. 8, 1974 (Department of Defense Appropriation Act), Public Law No. 93-437, title VIII, sec. 310, 83 Stat. 1212, 1226; Department of Defense Directive No. 1330.2, sec. III, par. F (Jan. 19, 1953).

22

Finally, the :Javy explained that the pool was originally constructed with appropriated funds during the early stages of &SC Crane `s development and explains that "basic maintenance to facilities of the type here involved is a proper charge to appropriated funds. " (Navy Comptroller Manual, 075260, 4b(15) .) Although the Navy Industrial Fund was para. used to finance some of the repairs to the pool, the Navy has decision" to stop using the fund to finance made a "management welfare and recreation activities. l?he Navy also said that in vie-w of ths hi;h operating cost of t&e pcoi, t;?c Zi-;ili;n Employees Association elected to end its sponsorship and the pool was closed. of specific constraints in appropriation Given the lack and authorization language, DOD directives, or Navy regulations, determining the proper use of funds considered available for welfare and recreation is largely a matter of judgment. Issues have surfaced, however, which illustrate the need for definitive congressional guidance on the intended use of public funds considered available for "welfare and recreation. " The Congress needs to take a clear stand on its willingness to appropriate public funds for specific types of morale, welfare, and recreation activities for both military 3n and rl;w;1; tiLV LIIULL personnel. We are net implying that either too much or too little is being spent for these purposes. Howthe amounts and purposes should be explicitly expressed, ever, thereby ameliorating the problems of interpretation and afterthe-fact judgmental criticism. For several years we have questioned (1) DOD's guidance to the military departments concerning appropriated fund support to nonappropriated fund activities and (2) the practices of the military services in doing so. Despite DOD's general agreement with our previous recommendations, actual practices apparently have not changed. For example: --In 1965 we reported l/ that over 5,000 enlisted personnel in DOD were assigned to nonmilitarv activities such as officers' and noncommissioned officers' clubs, hobby shops, bowling alleys, and golf courses. We proposed that the service secretaries issue instructions restricting such assignments. The Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower made no specific comment on our proposal at that time but advised us that such staffing was continually under surveillance. of the Assignment (B-146890), of Dec. Enlisted 27, 1965. Personnel to Nonmilitary

l/Review Activities

23

--In

1368 we again reported l-/ that, among other matters and contrary to DOD policy, military personnel were assigned to nonappropriated fund activities, and Utilities were charged to such activities at less than full cost. Our recommendations suggested that procedures be adopted to recover all such costs and that using military personnel to operate nonappropriated funds be minimized. The Deputy Assistant Secretary of f)efense (Military Personnel Policy) agreed with our findings and added that these practices could be attributed to the broad language of existing directives. The directive was to be reevaluated with the objective of providing definitive direction to the military departments. issued 1330.2 in

--Reports Directive
------

sane conditions

1375 2/ disclosed essentially as in 1968. As of February
still had not been changed.

the 1376,

l/Need

Reimbursement

Improved Controls for Services duasi-tiiliitary Activities

for

in Military Departments to Ensure Provided to Nonmilitary and (B-i63136 j , Feb. 26, 1968.

2/Support of Hunting and Fishing at Matagorda Island, Texas (FXD-74-109) Jan. 6, 1975; Unrecovered Costs for Utility Services Furnished to Nonappropriated Fund and Non-Government Activities (LCD-74-338) Feb. 7, 1975; and Cost of aperating Military Recreation Camps in Alaska (FPCD-75-138) May 22, 1375.

24

CHAPTER ------

6

CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATICNS ------P--c_----CONCLUSIONS -Only 23 of the Crane were directly military activities. of the total military assigned to provide 68 military personnel assigned at NWSC involved in center operations and other The remaining 45, about two-thirds compiement, plus Ia civilians, were military personnel support services.

A total of about $1.2 million was spent annually to maintain a military presence at the center, including $533,000 for pay and allowances of the 55 support personnel and $236,300 to support military personnel.

DOD'S policy for been fully implemented primarily industrial, military personnel s

staffing support at YWSC Crane. managing it does

activities has not Because the center is not necessarily require

We reported 1/ on a similar situation in which the work Final-cc Cer;ter and Automated Ser-vforces at the Marine Corps ices Center in Kansas City, Missouri, included both Marines The centers were mainly administrative. and civilians. Since the work could be done by civilians, we recommended that the Secretary of Defense direct the Marine Corps to employ civilians at the centers and review similar activiThe Assistant Secreties of the Army, Navy, and Air Force. tary of Defense (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) basically As of February 1976, howagreed with our recommendations. ever, we have seen no evidence of actions taken on those recommendations. At NWSC Crane, 17 civilians and 3 military personnel could do the essential managerial, supervisory, and technical work assigned to 23 military personnel at the end of 1974. With this adjustment and the addition of 18 civilians in the the Navy could eliminate 45 military and medical department, 10 civilian support positions and save about $858,000 Further, annually in personnel and personnel support costs. civilians could be trained to eventually replace the remaining military personnel.
---------

l/Opportunity Employing June 19,

to Reduce Costs Civilians Instead 1974.

and Improve of Marines

Efficiency (B-146890),

by

25

The Navy's systems for determining military manpower requirements and assigning enlisted personnel were not working at NWSC Crane. The Navy had not made workload studies or developed staffing standards to substantiate the center's military manpower needs. Since 1970, the number of enlisted men at NWSC Crane has generally exceeded authorized levels by 26 to 73 percent. As mentioned on problem is being addressed at all Navy shore page 20, this activities, including Crane. Since the program is not scneduled for comgietion untii fiscai year isltjir, it shouid be monitored periodically to insure that corrective action is taking place. Regarding the portion of the support costs spent on welfare and recreation, the broad wording of the appropriations acts, coupled with the language of DOD and Navy Department directives, gives base commanding officers great freedom in determining the nature and extent of 2ermissable recreational facility funding. RECOMMENaATIONS We recommend that the Secretary of Defense:

--Direct the Navy to convert the work force at NWSC Crane as discussed in our alternative staffing plan. To the extent possible, changes from Navy military personnel to civilian personnel should be made by normal rotation and reassignment. As these changes occur, Navy appropriations should be adjusted to reduce manpower costs. --Have reviews made at all other commercial and industrial military support activities to identify how military personnel could be reduced and how the activities could be made more efficient and economical by employing more civilians. MATTERS FOR CONSIDERATION BY -- THE CONGRESS The Congress of Defense to: should consider requiring the Secretary

--Annually assure the Congress that the work forces being used at industrial facilities are the most economical and efficient mixture of military, civilian, and contractor labor.

26

--Annually identify and justify the dollar amount and contemplated object of the funds being requested to support morale, recreation, and welfare of both military and civilian personnel. Congress should consider the definitive guidelines on the use able for welfare and recreation.
The

desirability of funds

of establishing considered avail-

The Department of defense is complying with our recommendation to review all commercial and industrial activities to determine if reductions in military staffing can be made. The review, however, will not be limited "to the two options that GAO addresses; status quo or complete civilianization." DOD: will review alternatives that include military manpower where it is either required, or is less expensive on a billet by billet basis than civilian manpower. But we will seek to minimize the total cost of military presence by reducing the supper, '-gz-military o-jerhead. "
I'* * *

27

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX I

28

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX I

%n at% 0s ?P a0

29

PACKAGE LIQUOR STORE. LOCATED WITHIN THE OFFICERS' CLUB, THIS STORE PROVIDES A RETAIL LIQUOR SALES OUTLET FOR ACTIVE AND RETIRED MILITARY PERSONNEL AND A WHOLESALE OUTLET FOR OFFICERS' AND ENLISTED MEN'S CLUBS.

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX I

31

APPENDIX

I

APPENDIX

I

32

NAVY EXCHANGE STORE. THE STORE CARRIES A VARIETY OF PRODUCTS, FOOD, SMOKlNG ACCESSORIES, PHOTOGRAPHIC EQUIPMENT, HARDWARE, AND GARDEN SUPPLIES, TOYS, TOILETRIES, CLOTHING, AND SHOES. 80 PERCENT OF THE STORE'S CUSTOMERS ARE RETIRED MILITARY PERSONNEL.

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX I

34

APPENDIX I

APPENDIX I

35

APPENDIX

II

APPENDIX

II

UNITED STATES GENERAL ACCOUNTING
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20548

OFFICE

March

25,

1975

B-160613

The Honorable The Secretary
Dear Mr.
In

of Navy

Secretary:

the course of some workrue ire performing at the Naval AmmuDepot, Crane, Indiana, we have come across certain activities the propriety of which, based on the record currently before us, seems questionable. Cenerally these matters relate to the use of appropriated funds to support nonappropriated fun1 GAB) activities.

nition

The first NAF (ICZL~YI;)I is the T-hole golf course operated as a NAF revenue-producing activity. In the 39 month period covered by our review, it appears that $92,700 in appropriated funds were spent on the course; $55,100 for the lncrtmental construction of a clubhouse; $20,100 for maintaining fairways; and S17,SOO for landscaping and Improved parking areas. Utilities rare also furnished without charge,

Four contracts have been award.:d for construction of the clubhouse and a fifth is pending. One, award+:d on June 29, 1972, uas for conl truction of a 20 by 48 foot prefab metal building in the amount of $13,500 from the Navy's Operation aid Maintenance (O&MS) appropriation. The second, awarded on March 23, 19,3, at a cost of over $13,000 for the completion of that metal buildijcg was paid for from the Eavy Industrfal Fund (NIF), 10 U.S.C. 32AO8 (1970). The third, awarded on May 25, 1973, at a cost of S13.082 paid from OWN tunds, provided for the construction of a second prrfab metal building. The fourth contract, awarded on February 1, 19;4, at a cost of $15,028 paid from NIF funds, provided for tl;e corstruction of an entrance enclosure joining the two metal bulldings. :IIF funds of SiS,364 have Lreu contract for paneling, insulation earmarked for the award of a fifth and other interior improvements in the second prefab metal building. Crane's 5-year scation plan for minor construction also includes $90,000 in three equal increments to expand the golf course to 18 holes.

The skond )IAF activity of concern here is the swimming pool and picnic facilities qerated by the Civilian Employees Association for * the Depot's 4506 civilian employees and members of their families, none of vhom reside at the Depot. Revenue generated by fees are used

36

APPENDIX

II

B-160?

i 3

to pay the salaries of the pool manager and lifeguards. In the period covered by our audit, O&MN and NKF funds were charged over $40,000 for pool repairs and uaintenance and the employees' association has not been billed for any services, including utilities provided. Third, we are concerned about the providing of services to the officer and eciieted ~esr2. `;op2cj. Prcz Jziy 1, i9ii to Baptember 30, 1974, custodial services, refuse and garbage collection and maintenance of lawns and shrubs were provided at a cost, paid from appropriated The costs for utilities, maintenance and funds, of about $10,000. repairs to the interior of the clubs during the same period amounted to about $84,000 from appropriated funds. The clubs were billed only $4,400 for utilities; all of the other services were provided without reimbursement. We are writing for a complete report and expression of your views on these matters. I!e are interested, among other things, in the authority for using appropriated funds for construction of a clubhouse and golf course and whether applicable procurenent idws and regulations were followed in that construction; the authority for expending aQQtOpriated funds (including NIF funds) for utilities, operation end maintenance, repair and other services for each of these three NAP activities; the source of funding, and authority therefor, for the swimming pool and related facilities; and the authority used to expend appropriated funds to pay ihe salaries of the Officer and Enlisted Messes' club managers and assistant managers particularly in view of our decision of January 15, 1962, B-147360, and the Secretary of the Air Force's response thereto, copies enclosed. Sincerely /s/James yours, E. Masterson : Counsel

.

Jemee E. Uasteraon Aaaietant General Enclosures

37

APPENDIX

III

DEPARTMENT OFFICE OF THE

OF

THE

NAVY

SECRETARY 0. C. 20350

WASHll4GTON.

OCT.

30,

1975

Mr. James E. Masterson Assistant General Counsel General Accounting Office Washington, D. C. 20548 Dear Mr. Masterson:
to

The Secretary of Defense has asked me to reply 25 March 1975 to the Secretary of the Kavy concerning Indiana which at the Navai Ammunition Depot, Crane, (B-160813, OSD Case 84058). Your letter raises two fundamental specific expenditures cited. The first ability of Navy Industrial Funds (NIF) and the second relates tothe expenses, funds generally for welfare and recreation

your letter of certain activities seemed questionable

questions concerning the question concerns the availfor welfare and recrearion availability of appropriated expenses.

m*L to the zxzi3n5ility of ?!IF to finance welfare aad ..a.&.. rcspxt recreation expenses, wa have made a management decision not to use NIF in the future. However, it is'not improper to use NIF. NIF is ? revolving fund and ultimately reimbursed by customer funds; generally from Operaticn and Maintenance, and Research, Development, Test and nluation appropriations which have specific availability for welfare :1 ,J icreation. (See sections 820 and 842, DOD Appropriation Act 1975. Similar availability was reflected during the years here in question.) I,,'d troblem with using NIF to finance welfare and recreation expenses Is :hc lack of necessary visibility in the budget process. This may lOad to inclusion of welfare and recreation eqenses ir. overhead at so-e activities. Upon receipt of your letter, the Naval Sea Systems Command, successor to the Naval Ordnance Systems Command (the former parent command of NAD Crane),was advised to specifically assure separate identification and funding of welfare and recreation expenses. On the matter housc, the present Naval Sea Systems of the alleged incremental construction of the clubCommanding Officer, pursuant to the inquiry of the Command , pursued the matter and advised as follows:

"1. In a telephone ccnversation with the previous Commanding Officer (CA.?T .T. C. Donahue, USN, RET) on this date, I have determined that the contract awarded

38

APPENDIX III

APPENDIX III

"on 29 June 1972 for the erection of a metal building (#2946) at the golf course vas for the sole purpose of providing an immediately usable building as a replacement for the old wooden building then in use CAPT Donahue as a pro shop and `starter shack.' further stated that there was no intent at that time to enlarge or add additional facilities at the golf course. "2. This'first building (#2946) was used in 1973 before the NIF funded alteration and improvements were completed in January 1974. . "3. The second metal building (#2990) was built in mid-1973 as a recreation building. This building was an independent project and was used prior to interior, NIF funded, alterations and improvements. "4. The connecting buildings was completed to improve the habitability structure between the two in Hay 1974 as an After thought of buildings.

.

* * . .

"5. At no time in the course of planning improvements at the golf course was there intent to arrive at the total present installation by circumventing regulations. After a thorough review of actions taken over the past three years, it does appear in the case of building #2946 that a single OWN funded minor construction project without NIP funded alterations would have been preferred. In the case of building #2990, the construction was properly authorized for O&MN minor construction and was in fact used. The later IIF funded alterations and improvements (paneling, bar, lighting alterations, beverage storage area) appear justified as valid alterations." Based on the foregoing findings, it is tion of incremental construction cannot be of this nature, to avoid any semblance of should be incumbent on all higher echelon of and to review in advance similar projects thereof. NAD Crane has advised that the long course to 18 holes has been canceled. On the matter of the golf utilities, it has been a long normal maintenance of fairways our opinion that the allegasustained. In situations statutory violations, it commands to require submission to determine propriety

range

plan

to

expand

the

golf

course fairway maintenance standing practice in the with appropriated funds

including Navy to provide since these costs

39

APPENDIX III

APPENDIX III

more to normal qrounds maimtenance df an activity rather a special cyst dc. in ..ie case of "greens". In the case at hand, the fees collected r;cre used to pay expenses of the "golf pro", rein+ burse the Depoe for utilities associated with the vending machines at the ps o sh*p, and costs related to maintenance of the greens.
are related

than

In the matter of the swimming pool operated by the Civilian Employees Association, this pool was originally constructed with appropriated funds during the early stages of the Depot's development. Of the $40,000 charged to appropriated funds for pool repairs and maintenance, approximately $26,000 was for resurfacing. It has been a long standing policy of the Navy that basic maintenaace to facilities of the type here involved is a proper charge to appropriated funds. Paragraph 075260 . of the Navy Comptroller Nanual provides: "4.b.(l.5) Maintenance and Repair of Facilities. Maintenance and repair of facilities includes the recurrent. day-to-day periodic or scheduled work required to preserve-or restorea facility, its installed equipment, and premieea to a condition in which it may be utilized effectively. This work as well as repairs dmcludes preventive maintanance made to a facility that ie not a part of scheduled maintenance. Except for [Military General Welfare and Recreation] activities, this does not include work done for purposes peculiar to the nonappropriated fund activity (i.e., creation of a pleasant atmosphere)." The nature financing of in repairs to the instant pool accordance with the foregoing qualified provision. for appropriated

fund

-The balance of the pool costs here involved, routine maintenance and utilities, are primarily of the type that are required under regulations (paragraph 075260 of the Navy Comptroller Manual) to be financed with nonappropriated funds. By reason of high operating costs of the pool, :!le Civilian Employees Association at the Depot elected not-to sponsor the said pool in calendar year 1975, and the pool in fact has been closed. In the matter of appropriated fund support for enlisted messes (open), the various items of expense cited in your letter are provided for in. paragraph 075260 of the Navy Comptroller Manual. Authority for "welfare and recreation" in annual appropriation acts i5 cousidered sufficPent authority for this support. Regulations related to appropriated fund support of officers messes (open) are more restrictive. Generally, these open messes must finance with nonappropriated funds utilities (except where they may be prorated

40

APPENDIX III

APPENDIX III

feeding). At the Depot, the mess did Officers messes (open) are also required To the extent these to finance custodial and janitorial services. funded by the ness heretofore, costs were not reimbursed or otherwise they are now required to do so. Garbage collection is provided on a it can be argued that nonreimbursable basis. Although technically there is a reimbursable cost involved, as a practical matter the incidence is impractical to measure. Garbage and trash removal is a routine operation at any activity. This includes scheduled pick-ups at general enlisted messes, officers messes (closed), housing areas, etc. Additional cost to pick up administrative buildings, shops, .open mess trash and garbage is considered too infinitesimal to measure. As a consequence, this service is provided on a nonreimbursable basis.. Interior maintenance and repair is authorized to officers messes (open) on the same basis as discussed above for the civilian pool. To the extent repairs, maintenance, or other improvements are required for aesthetic purposes, such special costs must be financed with nonappropriated funds. Such has not been the case here.
in connection reimburse for utilities.

Fith

essential

Salaries of club managers appropriated funds are founded bility over clubs and messes. Manual authorizes: .

and assistant club managers financed with on the commanding officer's responsiParagraph 075260 of the Navy Comptroller

"4.b.(l) Command Supervision. Command supervision includes the assignment and utilization of emplovees paid from appropriated funds to provide command executive supervision at the nonappropriated fund activity." Through club managers, treasurers, and the like, commanding officers directly and effectively exercise their responsibility of these Federal instrumentalities. The matter of military and civilian personnel financed with appropriated funds for the foregoing purposes was recently justified in hearings before the House Appropriations Subcommittee on the Department of Defense. (See Douse Hearings on DOD Appropriation Act PY 1974, Part 5, pp. 957-960.) Thank you for the opportunity to express my views on these matters.

Sincerely

yours,

G. 3.

&JgNISlW

ASSESTANT SIECFGiXRY OP THE LX'JY {PIMANCIAL WiAGMIXT)

41

APPENDIX IV

APPENDIX IV

A%ISTANl

Sf.CHLlAItY WASHINGTON.0 C

OF 2QDl

DFbFNSE

' NOV.

26,

1975

Mr. H. 1. Krieger, Director Federal Personnel and Compensation United States General Accounting Washington, D. C. 20548 Dear Mr. Krieger,

Division Office

I

On behalf of the Secretary of Defense, we are providing ccwAnents on the General kcountrng Office (GAO) draft report, dated August 25, 1975, on `Maintaining a Military Presence in An Industrial Environment-Issues and Costs" (OSD Case #4058-A). This report focuses on a class of commercial and industrial type activities which are characterized by a predominantly civilian work force plus a relatively small military force which requires a significant support tail. The report states that there are about 90 such activities, exclusive of shipyards, with over 10,000 military personnel assigned.. Based on their study of Naval Amnunition Depot, Crane, Indiana, (NAD Crane) GAO concludes that substantial manpower and cost savings can be made at this activity by completely civilfanizing it and thereby eliminating the tail required to support the military personnel. GAO suggests that simflar manpower and cost savings might also be made in other commercial and industrial type activities through complete civilianizatlon. These conclusions are based on the premise that management of these activities does not require military personnel. GAO recommends that the Secretary of Defense:

- Direct the Navy to convert the work force at NAD Crane along the lines discussed in their alternative staffing plan. To the extent possible, changes from Navy military personnel to civilians should be accomplished by normal rotation and reass ignmerit. As these changes occur, Navy appropriations should be adjusted to reduce manpower costs. - Have reviews made at all other commercial and industrial mi litaiy support activities of the services to identify the reductions

42

APPENDIX

IV

APPENDIX

IV

in military that could We have revlewerl Lonsidoration. We do not
iCj

personnel be realized th? draft

and increased by civilianizing report

efficiency these the

and economy work forces. following cORll?MtS for

and offer

vour

believe that the GdO conclusion . . . that Department of ;"...i __.^^_^ A SLa '-ffisg ;dppsrt activities has net baen ""fJ ,C,IIF,`LF" The intent of Department of Defense at NAD Crane . . . is fully supported. Directive 1100.9 is to maintain upward mobility for civilian DOD personnel in the management structure of support activities. The criteria contained in this directive for designating support activity management positions as military or civilian provides for military management when experience in the oosition is essential to enable the officer oersonnel to assume responsibilities necessary to maintain combat-reiated support and proper career develobment. In both the Dioest and Chaoter 5 of the GAO draft reoort the conclusion that DoD's staffing policy has not been implemented at NAD' Crane is supported with the statement that, "Experience in these functions is not essential for officers to assume responsibilities under combat conditions or for military career development." There is a difference between responsibilities under combat conditions and responsibilities necessary to maintain combat-related support. We believe that it is necessary to keep a certain number of officers in activities such as NAD, Crane, for two reasons. First, these officers will rotate through billets in management headquarters level activities where overall management of these fi& 2 .=dLt-;viti~.: _ i-: edicised. Enpeiiente in the field aiiivitses ?nhancts their ability to manage these activities from the headquarters level. Second, a cadre of officers with experience in field activities is required for rapid expansion of these activities and the re-opening of inactive activities under mobilization conditions.

LCf?.iiiE

2;:

;cr

We agree that the GAO report raises legitimate issues about the costs of maintaining a military presence in commercial and industrial military support activities. However, we believe that there may be alternatives other than complete civilianization which both accommodate our requirements for military presence in these activities and are cost competitive with the all civilian alternative proposed by GAO. We therefore concur with the recommendation to review all commercial and industrial activities to determine if reductions in military staffing can be made, and have initiated review action. We are not, however, limiting our review to the two options that GAO addresses; status quo or complete civilianization. We will review alternatives that include military manpower where it is either required, or is less expensive on a billet by billet basis than civilian manpower. na,t *Ia wip c,zek tc w.;Y.;)lI;=e t).= tct;: c-t nc --_ .`k us m:1:+.... .,s,,,cG,j presence by reducing the support-of-military overhead. At this force time we do not concur at NAD Crane along the in the recommendation to convert the lines discussed in the draft report.

work

43

APPENDIX IV

APPENDIX IV

This activity will be examined in the overall review of the staffing Of Alterations to the authorized conimercidl and industrial activities. m~litdry/civilian mix ot personnel directly involved in depot operations at this activity should be withheld until revised staffing policies resulting from the overall review are established. The Uepartment of the Navy's comments on the draft report are attached. . They provide a more detailed discussion of some of GAO's findings and We have also been informally advised coFrments regarding NAD Crane. by the National Security Agency that the Naval Security Group Detachment at NAD Crane will be relocated within the next year. GAO's continuing interest Defense is appreciated. in reducing manpower costs in the Department

of

Sincerely,

Attachment

.

1

GAO note:

The full text of the Department comments are not being included their length.. Where appropriate, included in fhe report.

of the Navy's here because of they have been

44

APYEt'JDIX V

APPENDIX V

ALTERNATIVE -v-w-

STAFFING ------ PLAN

FOR

NWSC

CRANE

current --

staff

Proposed

staff

cost.5 (note ai -em-- Com~ratrve -current Propo~%ving::;-:d~~ -starr tronal costs staff -----

L-1

Center operations:

Administration: Commanding OEEicer, Captain Executive Officer, Commandec Command Projects Officer Lt. Commander Supervision:
Public Works OEeicer, Commander

Supervisory Supervisory
Not

General General

Engineer, Engineer,

GS-16 GS-15

$

37,600 32,700 27,375

s 41,750 38,750

s -4,150 -6,050 27,375

needed Civil Engineer, GS-iS (38-13 GS-13
OS-15

Supervisory

30,156 27,375 lb.700 13,400 30,150 26,100 13,775 32,700 31,Y25 25,325

33,750

-6,;t; -350 -11.025 -6,575
-a ,600

Assistant Public Works Officer Lt. Commander Lieutenant (JGI Shop Engineer, Facilities, Planning Officer, Ensign Ordnance Officer, Commander ASSiStant Ordnance Officer Lt. Commander Ordnance Special Projects Officer, Ensign Supply Officer, Commander Amm;;::;on Procurement Engineering Officer-in-Charge, Commander Assistant Officer-in-Charge, Lt. Commander Technical: Ordnance Disposal Team (note b): Officer-in-Charge, Warrant OfLicer Aviation Ordnanceman, Chief Torpedoman's Mate, First Class Construction Contracting Officer, Lieutenant Automatic Data Processing Equipment Maintenance, Electronics Technician, Second Class Other milltarv activities: Marine Corps Liaison Office: Marine Liaison Officer, First Lieutenant Marine Liarson Clerk. Staff Sergeant SeCUrity Group Detachment: Officer-in-Charge, Warrant Officer COnmWniCatlOns TechnicIan Chief Communicatlow Technlclan, Thlcd Class Mllltary personnel support: Administration: Military Personnel Officer, Lieutenant (CGI Personnelman, Second Class Civllian Personnel Clerk, GS-4 Civilian Pay Clerk, GS-4 Medical Department: Dlcector, Medlcal Deoactment. Lieutenant Medical Administrative Technician
HMC Tharzacy Te;bni;;a,, K-.:

Supervisory Civil Engineer, Supervisory Civil Engineer, Civil Engineer, GS-I1 Supervisory General Engineer, Supervisory
Not

27,725 21.725 19,975 38,750 27,725 32,025 38,750 32,025

General

Engineer, Officer, Engineer, Engineer,

GS-13 GS-14 GS-15 GS-14

-1,625 13,775 675 -6,825 -6,700

needed Supply Management Supervisory Supervisory General General

Retaxn

Retain
Retain Contract
Not

lY.775 17,250 15,900 Administrator, GS-12 20,000 ii 766

19,775 17,250 15,900 23,625 -3,625 ii.700 .-.. .u...LI

needed

Industrial Industrial Physical Physical Security

Specialist, Specialist, Security Security Clerk

GS-11 GS-7 Specialist, Specialist, GS-9 GS-7 GS-4

21,175 13,375 21,225 15,250 10,575

19,975 13,950 16,675 13,950 10,200

1,200 -57s 4,551r 1,300 375
L. .

(Typing),

Not Not Not

Not

needed needed needed needed Officer, GS-14 GS-7 GS-7

18,625 11,100 9,825 10,925 22,325 15,500 13,653 14,325 10.a50 11,100 12,100 ll,d25 12,175 11.450 10,575 11.325 lU,425 10,423 3,450 9,459 3,725 Y,725 9,725 ".725 d,i-i 10.33~ iG.356 10.3so 10,350 10,350 32,025 13,950 13,95@ 13,950 12,975 12,975
12,975

18.625 11; 100

9,825 lO,Y25
-9,TOU 1,553

Medical

X-ray Technician, HMI Clinical Lab Techniclan, HM2 X-ray Lab Technlclan, HM2 Optical TechnicIan, HH2 Administrative Corpsman, HM3 Sanltatlon TechnicIan. HMl Electrocardiogram Techn~clan, Corpsman, HM2 Lab Technlclan. Cocosman. HM,
Admlnlstration/Pharmacy,.HMJ Laboratory Pechnlclan, X-ray/Laboratory Tcalnee, A-cay/Laboratory Trainee, X-ray/Laboratory Trainee, HN rM

Supervisory Medical Technlclan, "L.---^.. - _ _ .. - _, Tect:i::zn, GS-' Medical Radiology Technician, Medical Technician, GS-6 Health Technician, GS-6 Health Technlclan, GS-6 Clerk-Typist, GS-3 Not needed Not
Not

-3riu 375 -2,125
-1,Sij -875

8,825

3,300 12,175 11.4511
10,575 ll,Y?j IL.423 10.4.5 9.45" 9,190 -Y,725 -Y.i;j -9 ,725

"A
W

needed needed needed Not needed Not needed Not needed Not needed Health Technlclan, Not II 2mbUIanc~ DrLvel,

GS-4 GS-4 GS-4 <s-4 ,;s-4 'K-5
WG-5

-3.725
-9,l:j -10,353 -lG.)jJ -lU,>jd -10,351) -10,350

WG-5
0 WG-5 WG-5

45

APPENDIX V
-current ___-staff Proposed staff ~111:ary personnel support Icontlnuedl: COlllmlSS.3ry: Shrp's Serviceman Master Chief Commissarvman. First Class Commissar~man; Second Class Commlssaryman, Second Class Clvillan Clerk Typist, GS-3 Clvllian Store Clerk, GS-3 Civilian Groceryman, WG-05 CIvilian Meat Cutter. WG-06
Navy exchange:

APPENDIX V
Comparative C"StS ,note ProDosed----aavlngs current
staff stiff t1ona1 --__--

a,

---or addlcosts f-1

Not

Not Not Not Not
Not

Not Not Not Not
Not

needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed

a

21,725 14,725 11,775 12,900
8,075 8,800 11,225

5

-

13,175

S 21,725 14,725 11,775 12.900 8,075 8,800 11,225 13.175 18.000 13,125 11,700 12,100 15,775 16,525 12,300
20,550 14,725 14,725

Shio's Serviceman. Senior Chief Ship's Serviceman; First Class Ship's Serviceman, Second Class Shin's Serviceman. Second Class E"llstei men's club; Ship's Serviceman, Chief Offlcec's club: CIvilian Hess Manager, GS-10 Civilian Assistant Manager, GS-7 norale and welfare--sports and hobbies: Boatswain's Hate, Senior Chief

18.000
13.125 11,700 12,100 15,775
16,525 12,300 20,550 14,725

Not Not Not Not Not
Not Not Not

Gunner's Nate, Guns, First
Hachinist Boatswain's Hate,

Class

needed
needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed needed

First Class Mate, Second Class

14,725 11,700
11,700 10,675

Gunner's Hate, Guns, Third Class Hate, Fireman Machinist Seaman Apprentice sachelor officer's quarters: Moss Management Specialist, First Class Mess Management Specialist, Second Class Ness nanagement Specialist, Third Class Speclallst, ~SS Management Third Class Specialist, Seaman Ness Nanagement Hess Nanagement Speclalrst, Seaman Ness nanagement Specialist, Seaman E"llsted men's mess: Commissaryman, Chief Commissaryman, Third Class Commissaryman, Seaman CivIlian Food Service Worker, WG-02 Clvilian Food Service Worker. WG-02 Total E/Costs Include pay and allowances, retirement, tion, and other factors published 1" Narch Personnel I" the Department of Defense." b/Clvilzans could be trained and eventually

Storekeeper,

Second Class

11,700
11,700 10,675 10,000 9.450 14,325 13,025 11.850 11,850 10,450 10,450 10.850 14,550 11,850 10,150 9,300 8,350 $464,625

Not
Not

Not Not
Not

10,000 9.450 14,325 13,025 11,850 11,850
10,450 10,450 10,850 14,550

Not Not
Not Not Not Not

Not Not Not Not Not

11,850 10,150 9.300
--_ 8.350

-:-$737,250

51,201,875 -

training, educational and 1974 DOD memorandum entitled replace
the

income tax benefits, unempluyment compensa"Economic Cost of Nilitary and Civilian disposal team.

military

ordnance

46

.

APPENDIX VI PRINCIPAL -m-e-OFFICIALS

APPENDIX VI

RESPONSIBLE FOR ADMINISTERING ----_I_ -ACTIVITIES DISCUSSED IN THIS REPORT -mm Tenure From DEPARTMENT B-e OF DEFENSE SECRETARY OF DEFENSE: Donald H. Rumsfeld James R. Schlesinger William P. Clements Nov. July May Jan. 1975 1973 1973 1973 Present Nov. 1975 July 1973 Present of office
--

To

-

(acting)

DEPUTY SECRETARY OF DEFENSE: William P. Clements ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE (.MA$yy"," AND RESERVE AFFAIRS): m K. Brchm Car; W. Clewlow (acting)

Sept. June

1973 1973

Mar. Aug.

19?5 1973

DEPARTMENT -- OF THE NAVY SECRETARY OF THE NAVY: J. William Middendorf John W. Warner II Apr. May 1974 1972 Present Apr. 1974

ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF THE NAVY. (MANPOWER AND RESERVE AFFAIRS): Joseph T. McCullen, Jr. James E. Johnson CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS: Adm. James L. Holloway III Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt, Jr.

Sept. June July July

1973 1971 1974 1970

Present Sept. 1973 Present July 1974

47

Copies of GAO reports are available to the general public at a cost of $1 .OO a copy. There is no charge for reports furnrshed to Members of Congress and congressronal commrttee staff members. Offrcrals of Federal, State. and local governments may receive up to 10 copres free of charge. Members of the college Irbrarres, faculty members, and press; students; non-profrt organrzatrons; and representatrves of forergn governments may recerve up to 2 copies free of charge. Requests for larger quantctres should be accompanied by payment. Requesters entrtled to reports address then requests to: U.S. General Oistributron 441 G Street Washington, wrthout charge should

Accountrng Offrce Sectron. Room 4522 , NW. D.C. 20548 for or reports money

Requesters who are required to pay should send thetr requests with checks orders to: U.S. General Accountmg Distrtbutron Sectron P.O. Box 1020 Washington, DC. 20013 Offrce

Checks or money orders should be made the U.S. General Accounting Office. Superintendent of Documents coupons accepted. Please do not send --.cash. To expedrte number in lower right frllrng the lower corner of
use your order, lett corner and lhe the front cover.

payable Stamps will not

to or be

the ddte

report In the

,

AN EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

EMPLOYER
POSTAGE U. S. GENERAL AND FEES PAID OFFICI I TEzz I

UNITED STATES GENERALACCOUNTINGOFFICE WASHINGTON, D.C- 20548
OFFICIAL PENALTY BUSINESS USE,$300

ACCIOUNTINCi

FOR PRIVATE

THIRD CLASS

I

