DOD' S SPACE-EASED LASER PPOCRAM-- POTENTIAL, PROGRESS, AND PROBLEMS

7:he linited States is pursuing directed-energy weapon technologies involving devices for generating and controlli.ng laser, particle, and microwa.ve beams which may revolutionize military strategy, tactics, and doctrine. Eeam weapons could rapidly destroy targets by means of intense electromagnetic radiation or partiof by projectiles and cle fluxes I instea,d explosives, They are expected to play an increasing defense role in the future. Laser weapon technology is the best understood and most mature of the three types of directedenergy weapon technologies. The Department of Defense (DCD) has been developing technology to demonstrate the feasibility of high-energy ,laser weapon systems for various tactical and strategic missions. One widely discussed laser weapon concept involves a constellation of laser weapon platforms in space which has the potential to provide a credible air and ballistic missile defense system for the United States (no such defense currently exists).

Since no other: laser weapon concept currently being developed has such profound m.ilitary impl icstions, this report is devoted to the DGC space-haccd 1 aser (SRL) program. GAG' s review 01' the yjroqram was undertaken because of the recant :~ntt~r*t?rst: in the area by the Congress, C' CD, and the meri i.a . rlh~ r~~vj.ew assessed program proyccs.c;, t:xamine(I the issues associated with de:nonstratinq b131.,weai:ons potential, and assessed t h c? f'x i s t i n g SCL management structure. F' E:ASlE7.1 17Y II;' ST:)` -I._ .-...-.. ..__._. -...--,(` ..-. -.,,... ",,. h I, A P 0 N S II N C I., 1; ? A ` I l!! - l.-"._l"_l-_ "..-_. ..~.-_*-.._ I. . .",.. Whi1 e cf fective !I:I!L miosi.le defense systems cou.ld not be deployed until well into the ruturc, emerging technology has progressed to the point at whi.ch i.ts military use is relatively clear:. fiowc!ver r significant technical uncertainties remain to be resolved before i
,,,,, ` ,, "Y f I` j,d,, ~I/ ;;,t" ' , ,, " ` Y, dI,` d FEBRUARY 118037

C-MASAD-82-10
26,1962

I

coven a 1 imited Ei.rst-,y~~l~~;rration weapon system i s possible I The uncertainties relate to all. aspects of the system, including the laser device ; beam control; acquisition, tracking, and pointing ; surveill ante ; command, control, and communications; and launch and on-orbit Because of the early nature of the !jervi.Cihg technology , a diversity of opinion exists in the scientific, industr isl, and defense communities regarding whether current laser and rcllated technologies can support a constellation for air and missile defense that of SBL weapons would he effective and affordable.
l

The pace for resolving the uncertainties has been discussed in recent DOD studies of program i'lpt ions. GAO' s report discusses the pace of the current SBL program and two of DOD' s options to accelerate the pace of the program. These accelmost prudent by experts erated options considered move the technology development effort at a pace constrained by technology rather than funding limitations as is now the case. One option includes an early commitment to an on-orbit demonstration to obtain knowledge relating to system The report also discusses the adintegration. vantages and disadvantages of such an on-orbit demonstration. (See pp. 12 to 19.) LIMITATIONS OF THE EXISTING -~-l_-l_----~SRI., PROGRAM -.-. ll--ll_lll. --The Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DAKPA) within the Gffice of the Secretary of Defense is presently responsible for demonstrating the three major components of an SBL system--the laser, the large optics, and the extremely accurate acquisition, tracking, and painting system. These components referred to as Alpha, large optics demonstration experiment, and Talon Gold, respectively, are collectively called the DARPA Space Triad. During 1981, the Air Force has established a program office for SHL efforts. (See pp. 5 and 6.) GAO' s review tions in the struc:tLlre: highlighted existing the program following situaand management

---7' hc present program proach to developing T:his approach risks

is a funding-limited apthe technology for EELS. keeping the potentially

ii

revolutionary ment for the --Future above Board bility before

technology foreseeable

in component developfuture. (See pp. 13.)

prospects to augment the present program that recommended by the Defense Science As a result, all EEL f!easiappear bleak. issues will not be fully addressed (See p. 22.) a demonstration decision.

--Funding limitations have caused performance reductions and schedule slippages in the Triad programs. These delays will have implications later since future efforts require data from the DARPA programs. (See pp. 23 and 24.) --The SBL program is becoming The Air and DARPA effort. for SBL weapons development sponsible for demonstrating the Space Triad technologies. 22.) CONCLUSIONS AND -RECOMMENDATIONS -*-Because of the high cost and high military potential, GAO believes that S6Ls will continue to attract attention by both the Congress and the Office of the Secretary of Defense, particularly relating to program pace, management, and cost. the DOD Authorization Conference To illustrate, Eeport directed the Secretary of the Air Force to provide a plan for the management of future high-energy laser weapons programs and a study of the feasibility, cost, schedule, and technological issues associated with SBL weapons. While the Air Force is now responsible for SEL including a feasibility weapons development, demonstration, CA.FPA continues to be responsible for the Space Laser Triad programs which are designed to demonstrate the technical feasibility of the three major space laser components. CA0 believes that wit.h such long range military it is important that the SEL program potential, be a well structured, funded, and managed effort GAO questions whether such a f"rrm the outset. procjram currently exists. ` To address Secretary of these issues, Defense CRC recommends that the a joint Air Force Force is responsible while DARPA is rethe feasibility of (See pp. 21 and

iii

--establish a DOD SBL program clear and specific milestones which recognizes the relative within DOD,

plan containing and objectives priority of

SBLs

--commit the necessary funds to meet jectives and to maintain stability gram selected, and --establish program a management structure objectives efficiently. to

these obof the proaccomplish

VIEWS OF PROGRAM OFFICIALS .*.-GAO did not request official comments on this report because of the need to issue the report in time for congressional consideration of the fiscal year 1983 defense budget request. GAO did, however, discuss a draft of this report with high level officials associated with management of the program and they agreed with the facts presented. Their views are included as appropriate.

iv

